<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Golden Bough (Third Edition, Vol. 3 of 12)</title>
      <author><name reg="Frazer, James George">James George Frazer</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="3">Edition 3</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>January 12, 2013</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">41832</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="ja"></language>
      <language id="fr"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="de"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2013-01-12">January 12, 2013</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by David Edwards, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This file was produced from images generously
            made available by The Internet Archive.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Golden Bough</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">A Study in Magic and Religion</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">James George Frazer, D.C.L., LL.D., Litt.D.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Professor of Social Anthropology in the University of Liverpool</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Third Edition.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Vol. III.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Part II</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Taboo and the Perils of the Soul</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">New York and London</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">MacMillan and Co.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1911</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<div>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
<figure url='images/cover.jpg' rend='width: 40%'>
<figDesc>Cover Art</figDesc>
</figure>
</p>
<p>
[Transcriber's Note: The above cover image was produced by the submitter at
Distributed Proofreaders, and is being placed into the public domain.]
</p>
</div>

<pb n='v'/><anchor id='Pgv'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Preface.</head>

<p>
The term Taboo is one of the very few words which the
English language has borrowed from the speech of savages.
In the Polynesian tongue, from which we have adopted it, the
word designates a remarkable system which has deeply influenced
the religious, social, and political life of the Oceanic
islanders, both Polynesians and Melanesians, particularly
by inculcating a superstitious veneration for the persons of
nobles and the rights of private property. When about the
year 1886 my ever-lamented friend William Robertson
Smith asked me to write an article on Taboo for the Ninth
Edition of the <hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia Britannica</hi>, I shared what I
believe to have been at the time the current view of
anthropologists, that the institution in question was confined
to the brown and black races of the Pacific. But
an attentive study of the accounts given of Taboo by
observers who wrote while it still flourished in Polynesia
soon led me to modify that view. The analogies which the
system presents to the superstitions, not only of savages
elsewhere, but of the civilised races of antiquity, were too
numerous and too striking to be overlooked; and I came to
the conclusion that Taboo is only one of a number of similar
systems of superstition which among many, perhaps among
all races of men have contributed in large measure, under
many different names and with many variations of detail, to
build up the complex fabric of society in all the various sides
or elements of it which we describe as religious, social,
<pb n='vi'/><anchor id='Pgvi'/>
political, moral and economic. This conclusion I briefly
indicated in my article. My general views on the subject
were accepted by my friend Robertson Smith and applied
by him in his celebrated <hi rend='italic'>Lectures</hi> to the elucidation of some
aspects of Semitic religion. Since then the importance of
Taboo and of systems like it in the evolution of religion and
morality, of government and property, has been generally
recognised and has indeed become a commonplace of
anthropology.
</p>

<p>
The present volume is merely an expansion of the
corresponding chapter in the first edition of <hi rend='italic'>The Golden
Bough</hi>. It treats of the principles of taboo in their special
application to sacred personages, such as kings and priests,
who are the proper theme of the book. It does not profess
to handle the subject as a whole, to pursue it into all its
ramifications, to trace the manifold influences which systems
of this sort have exerted in moulding the multitudinous
forms of human society. A treatise which should adequately
discuss these topics would far exceed the limits which I have
prescribed for myself in <hi rend='italic'>The Golden Bough</hi>. For example, I
have barely touched in passing on the part which these
superstitions have played in shaping the moral ideas and
directing the moral practice of mankind, a profound subject
fraught perhaps with momentous issues for the time when
men shall seriously set themselves to revise their ethical
code in the light of its origin. For that the ethical like
the legal code of a people stands in need of constant
revision will hardly be disputed by any attentive and dispassionate
observer. The old view that the principles of right
and wrong are immutable and eternal is no longer tenable.
The moral world is as little exempt as the physical world
from the law of ceaseless change, of perpetual flux. Contemplate
the diversities, the inconsistencies, the contradictions
of the ethical ideas and the ethical practice, not merely of
different peoples in different countries, but of the same
<pb n='vii'/><anchor id='Pgvii'/>
people in the same country in different ages, then say
whether the foundations of morality are eternally fixed and
unchanging. If they seem so to us, as they have probably
seemed to men in all ages who did not extend their views
beyond the narrow limits of their time and country, it is in
all likelihood merely because the rate of change is commonly
so slow that it is imperceptible at any moment and can only
be detected by a comparison of accurate observations
extending over long periods of time. Such a comparison,
could we make it, would probably convince us that if we
speak of the moral law as immutable and eternal, it can
only be in the relative or figurative sense in which we apply
the same words to the outlines of the great mountains, by
comparison with the short-lived generations of men. The
mountains, too, are passing away, though we do not see
it; nothing is stable and abiding under or above the sun.
We can as little arrest the process of moral evolution as we
can stay the sweep of the tides or the courses of the stars.
</p>

<p>
Therefore, whether we like it or not, the moral code by
which we regulate our conduct is being constantly revised
and altered: old rules are being silently expunged and new
rules silently inscribed in the palimpsest by the busy, the
unresting hand of an invisible scribe. For unlike the public
and formal revision of a legal code, the revision of the moral
code is always private, tacit, and informal. The legislators
who make and the judges who administer it are not clad in
ermine and scarlet, their edicts are not proclaimed with the
blare of trumpets and the pomp of heraldry. We ourselves
are the lawgivers and the judges: it is the whole people who
make and alter the ethical standard and judge every case by
reference to it. We sit in the highest court of appeal,
judging offenders daily, and we cannot if we would rid
ourselves of the responsibility. All that we can do is to
take as clear and comprehensive a view as possible of the
evidence, lest from too narrow and partial a view we
<pb n='viii'/><anchor id='Pgviii'/>
should do injustice, perhaps gross and irreparable injustice,
to the prisoners at the bar. Few things, perhaps, can better
guard us from narrowness and illiberality in our moral judgments
than a survey of the amazing diversities of ethical
theory and practice which have been recorded among the
various races of mankind in different ages; and accordingly
the Comparative Method applied to the study of ethical
phenomena may be expected to do for morality what the
same method applied to religious phenomena is now doing
for religion, by enlarging our mental horizon, extending the
boundaries of knowledge, throwing light on the origin of
current beliefs and practices, and thereby directly assisting
us to replace what is effete by what is vigorous, and what is
false by what is true. The facts which I have put together
in this volume as well as in some of my other writings may
perhaps serve as materials for a future science of Comparative
Ethics. They are rough stones which await the master-builder,
rude sketches which more cunning hands than mine
may hereafter work up into a finished picture.
</p>

<p>
J. G. Frazer.
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Cambridge</hi>,</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>1st February 1911</hi>.</l>
</lg>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. The Burden Of Royalty.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. Royal and Priestly Taboos.'/>
<head>§ 1. Royal and Priestly Taboos.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Life of
divine
kings and
priests
regulated
by minute
rules.
The
Mikado or
Dairi of
Japan.</note>
At a certain stage of early society the king or priest is
often thought to be endowed with supernatural powers or
to be an incarnation of a deity, and consistently with
this belief the course of nature is supposed to be more or
less under his control, and he is held responsible for bad
weather, failure of the crops, and similar calamities.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, vol. i. pp. 332 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>,
373 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> To
some extent it appears to be assumed that the king's power
over nature, like that over his subjects and slaves, is
exerted through definite acts of will; and therefore if
drought, famine, pestilence, or storms arise, the people
attribute the misfortune to the negligence or guilt of their
king, and punish him accordingly with stripes and bonds,
or, if he remains obdurate, with deposition and death.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, vol. i. pp. 352 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
Sometimes, however, the course of nature, while regarded as
dependent on the king, is supposed to be partly independent
of his will. His person is considered, if we may express it
so, as the dynamical centre of the universe, from which lines
of force radiate to all quarters of the heaven; so that any
motion of his&mdash;the turning of his head, the lifting of his
hand&mdash;instantaneously affects and may seriously disturb
some part of nature. He is the point of support on which
hangs the balance of the world, and the slightest irregularity
on his part may overthrow the delicate equipoise. The
greatest care must, therefore, be taken both by and of him;
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
and his whole life, down to its minutest details, must be so
regulated that no act of his, voluntary or involuntary, may
disarrange or upset the established order of nature. Of this
class of monarchs the Mikado or Dairi, the spiritual emperor
of Japan, is or rather used to be a typical example. He is
an incarnation of the sun goddess, the deity who rules the
universe, gods and men included; once a year all the gods
wait upon him and spend a month at his court. During
that month, the name of which means <q>without gods,</q> no one
frequents the temples, for they are believed to be deserted.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Manners and Customs of the Japanese
in the Nineteenth Century: from
recent Dutch Visitors to Japan, and the
German of Dr. Ph. Fr. von Siebold</hi>
(London, 1841), pp. 141 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
The Mikado receives from his people and assumes in his
official proclamations and decrees the title of <q>manifest or
incarnate deity</q> (<foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>Akitsu Kami</foreign>) and he claims a general
authority over the gods of Japan.<note place='foot'>W. G. Aston, <hi rend='italic'>Shinto</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>the Way of
the Gods</hi>) (London, 1905), p. 41;
Michel Revon, <hi rend='italic'>Le Shintoïsme</hi>, i. (Paris,
1907), pp. 189 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The Japanese
word for god or deity is <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>kami</foreign>. It is
thus explained by the native scholar
Motoöri, one of the chief authorities on
Japanese religion: <q>The term <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>Kami</foreign>
is applied in the first place to the various
deities of Heaven and Earth who
are mentioned in the ancient records as
well as their spirits (<foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>mi-tama</foreign>) which
reside in the shrines where they are
worshipped. Moreover, not only
human beings, but birds, beasts, plants
and trees, seas and mountains, and all
other things whatsoever which deserve
to be dreaded and revered for the extraordinary
and pre-eminent powers
which they possess, are called <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>Kami</foreign>.
They need not be eminent for surpassing
nobleness, goodness, or serviceableness
alone. Malignant and uncanny
beings are also called <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>Kami</foreign> if only
they are the objects of general dread.
Among <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>Kami</foreign> who are human beings
I need hardly mention first of all the
successive Mikados&mdash;with reverence be
it spoken.... Then there have been
numerous examples of divine human
beings both in ancient and modern
times, who, although not accepted by
the nation generally, are treated as
gods, each of his several dignity, in
a single province, village, or family.</q>
Hirata, another native authority on
Japanese religion, defines <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>kami</foreign> as a
term which comprises all things strange,
wondrous, and possessing <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>isao</foreign> or virtue.
And a recent dictionary gives the following
definitions: <q><foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>Kami</foreign>. 1. Something
which has no form but is only
spirit, has unlimited supernatural power,
dispenses calamity and good fortune,
punishes crime and rewards virtue.
2. Sovereigns of all times, wise and
virtuous men, valorous and heroic persons
whose spirits are prayed to after
their death. 3. Divine things which
transcend human intellect. 4. The
Christian God, Creator, Supreme Lord.</q>
See W. G. Aston, <hi rend='italic'>Shinto</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>the Way of
the Gods</hi>), pp. 8-10, from which the
foregoing quotations are made. Mr.
Aston himself considers that <q>the deification
of living Mikados was titular
rather than real,</q> and he adds: <q>I
am not aware that any specific so-called
miraculous powers were authoritatively
claimed for them</q> (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p.
41). No doubt it is very difficult for
the Western mind to put itself at the
point of view of the Oriental and to
seize the precise point (if it can be said
to exist) where the divine fades into
the human or the human brightens into
the divine. In translating, as we must
do, the vague thought of a crude theology
into the comparatively exact language
of civilised Europe we must
allow for a considerable want of correspondence
between the two: we must
leave between them, as it were, a
margin of cloudland to which in the
last resort the deity may retreat from
the too searching light of philosophy
and science.</note> For example, in an
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
official decree of the year 646 the emperor is described as
<q>the incarnate god who governs the universe.</q><note place='foot'>M. Revon, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 190 n.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rules
of life
formerly
observed
by the
Mikado.</note>
The following description of the Mikado's mode of life
was written about two hundred years ago:&mdash;<note place='foot'>Kaempfer, <q>History of Japan,</q>
in Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>,
vii. 716 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> However, Mr. W. G.
Aston tells us that Kaempfer's statements
regarding the sacred character of
the Mikado's person cannot be depended
on (<hi rend='italic'>Shinto, the Way of the Gods</hi>, p. 41,
note †). M. Revon quotes Kaempfer's
account with the observation that, <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>les
naïvetés recèlent plus d'une idée juste</foreign></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Le Shintoïsme</hi>, vol. i. p. 191, note <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>).
To me it seems that Kaempfer's description
is very strongly confirmed by
its close correspondence in detail with
the similar customs and superstitions
which have prevailed in regard to
sacred personages in many other parts
of the world and with which it is most
unlikely that Kaempfer was acquainted.
This correspondence will be brought
out in the following pages.</note>
</p>

<p>
<q>Even to this day the princes descended of this family
more particularly those who sit on the throne, are looked
upon as persons most holy in themselves, and as Popes by
birth. And, in order to preserve these advantageous notions
in the minds of their subjects, they are obliged to take an
uncommon care of their sacred persons, and to do such
things, which, examined according to the customs of other
nations, would be thought ridiculous and impertinent. It
will not be improper to give a few instances of it. He
thinks that it would be very prejudicial to his dignity and
holiness to touch the ground with his feet; for this reason
when he intends to go anywhere, he must be carried thither
on men's shoulders. Much less will they suffer that he
should expose his sacred person to the open air, and the
sun is not thought worthy to shine on his head. There is
such a holiness ascribed to all the parts of his body that he
dares to cut off neither his hair, nor his beard, nor his nails.
However, lest he should grow too dirty, they may clean him
in the night when he is asleep; because, they say, that
which is taken from his body at that time, hath been stolen
from him, and that such a theft doth not prejudice his
holiness or dignity. In ancient times, he was obliged to sit
on the throne for some hours every morning, with the
imperial crown on his head, but to sit altogether like a
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
statue, without stirring either hands or feet, head or eyes,
nor indeed any part of his body, because, by this means, it
was thought that he could preserve peace and tranquillity
in his empire; for if, unfortunately, he turned himself on
one side or the other, or if he looked a good while towards
any part of his dominions, it was apprehended that war,
famine, fire, or some other great misfortune was near at hand
to desolate the country. But it having been afterwards discovered,
that the imperial crown was the palladium, which by
its immobility<note place='foot'>In Pinkerton's reprint this word
appears as <q>mobility.</q> I have made
the correction from a comparison with
the original (Kaempfer, <hi rend='italic'>History of
Japan</hi>, translated from the original
Dutch manuscript by J. G. Scheuchzer,
London, 1728, vol. i. p. 150).</note> could preserve peace in the empire, it was
thought expedient to deliver his imperial person, consecrated
only to idleness and pleasures, from this burthensome duty,
and therefore the crown is at present placed on the throne
for some hours every morning. His victuals must be dressed
every time in new pots, and served at table in new dishes:
both are very clean and neat, but made only of common
clay; that without any considerable expense they may be
laid aside, or broke, after they have served once. They
are generally broke, for fear they should come into the hands
of laymen, for they believe religiously, that if any layman
should presume to eat his food out of these sacred dishes, it
would swell and inflame his mouth and throat. The like ill
effect is dreaded from the Dairi's sacred habits; for they
believe that if a layman should wear them, without the
Emperor's express leave or command, they would occasion
swellings and pains in all parts of his body.</q> To the same
effect an earlier account of the Mikado says: <q>It was considered
as a shameful degradation for him even to touch the ground
with his foot. The sun and moon were not even permitted
to shine upon his head. None of the superfluities of the
body were ever taken from him, neither his hair, his beard,
nor his nails were cut. Whatever he eat was dressed in
new vessels.</q><note place='foot'>Caron, <q>Account of Japan,</q> in
Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, vii.
613. Compare B. Varenius, <hi rend='italic'>Descriptio
regni Japoniae et Siam</hi> (Cambridge,
1673), p. 11: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nunquam attingebant
(quemadmodum et hodie id observat)
pedes ipsius terram: radiis Solis caput
nunquam illustrabatur: in apertum
aërem non procedebat</foreign>,</q> etc. The first
edition of this book was published by
Elzevir at Amsterdam in 1649. The
<hi rend='italic'>Geographia Generalis</hi> of the same
writer had the honour of appearing in
an edition revised and corrected by
Isaac Newton (Cambridge, at the
University Press, 1672).</note>
</p>

<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rules
of life
observed
by kings
and priests
in Africa
and
America.</note>
Similar priestly or rather divine kings are found, at a
lower level of barbarism, on the west coast of Africa. At
Shark Point near Cape Padron, in Lower Guinea, lives the
priestly king Kukulu, alone in a wood. He may not touch a
woman nor leave his house; indeed he may not even quit
his chair, in which he is obliged to sleep sitting, for if he lay
down no wind would arise and navigation would be stopped.
He regulates storms, and in general maintains a wholesome
and equable state of the atmosphere.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsche Expedition
an der Loango-Küste</hi> (Jena, 1874-75),
i. 287 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, compare pp. 353
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> On Mount Agu in
Togo, a German possession in West Africa, there lives a fetish
or spirit called Bagba, who is of great importance for the
whole of the surrounding country. The power of giving or
withholding rain is ascribed to him, and he is lord of the
winds, including the Harmattan, the dry, hot wind which
blows from the interior. His priest dwells in a house on
the highest peak of the mountain, where he keeps the winds
bottled up in huge jars. Applications for rain, too, are
made to him, and he does a good business in amulets, which
consist of the teeth and claws of leopards. Yet though his
power is great and he is indeed the real chief of the land,
the rule of the fetish forbids him ever to leave the mountain,
and he must spend the whole of his life on its summit. Only
once a year may he come down to make purchases in the
market; but even then he may not set foot in the hut of any
mortal man, and must return to his place of exile the same
day. The business of government in the villages is conducted
by subordinate chiefs, who are appointed by him.<note place='foot'>H. Klose, <hi rend='italic'>Togo unter deutscher
Flagge</hi> (Berlin, 1899), pp. 189,
268.</note>
In the West African kingdom of Congo there was a supreme
pontiff called Chitomé or Chitombé, whom the negroes
regarded as a god on earth and all-powerful in heaven.
Hence before they would taste the new crops they offered
him the first-fruits, fearing that manifold misfortunes would
befall them if they broke this rule. When he left his residence
to visit other places within his jurisdiction, all married people
had to observe strict continence the whole time he was out;
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
for it was supposed that any act of incontinence would prove
fatal to him. And if he were to die a natural death, they
thought that the world would perish, and the earth, which he
alone sustained by his power and merit, would immediately
be annihilated.<note place='foot'>J. B. Labat, <hi rend='italic'>Relation historique de
l'Éthiopie occidentale</hi> (Paris, 1732), i.
254 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Similarly in Humbe, a kingdom of Angola,
the incontinence of young people under the age of puberty
used to be a capital crime, because it was believed to
entail the death of the king within the year. Of late the
death penalty has been commuted for a fine of ten oxen
inflicted on each of the culprits. This commutation has
attracted thousands of dissolute youth to Humbe from the
neighbouring tribes, among whom the old penalty is still
rigorously exacted.<note place='foot'>Ch. Wunenberger, <q>La Mission et
le royaume de Humbé, sur les bords
du Cunène,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Missions Catholiques</hi>,
xx. (1888) p. 262.</note> Amongst the semi-barbarous nations
of the New World, at the date of the Spanish conquest,
there were found hierarchies or theocracies like those of
Japan;<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, vol. i. pp. 415 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> in particular, the high pontiff of the Zapotecs
in Southern Mexico appears to have presented a close
parallel to the Mikado. A powerful rival to the king himself,
this spiritual lord governed Yopaa, one of the chief
cities of the kingdom, with absolute dominion. It is
impossible, we are told, to overrate the reverence in which
he was held. He was looked on as a god whom the earth
was not worthy to hold nor the sun to shine upon. He
profaned his sanctity if he even touched the ground with his
foot. The officers who bore his palanquin on their shoulders
were members of the highest families; he hardly deigned to
look on anything around him; and all who met him fell
with their faces to the earth, fearing that death would overtake
them if they saw even his shadow. A rule of continence
was regularly imposed on the Zapotec priests, especially
upon the high pontiff; but <q>on certain days in each year,
which were generally celebrated with feasts and dances, it
was customary for the high priest to become drunk. While
in this state, seeming to belong neither to heaven nor to
earth, one of the most beautiful of the virgins consecrated to
the service of the gods was brought to him.</q> If the child
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
she bore him was a son, he was brought up as a prince of
the blood, and the eldest son succeeded his father on the
pontifical throne.<note place='foot'>Brasseur de Bourbourg, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire des
nations civilisées du Mexique et de
l'Amérique-centrale</hi>, iii. 29 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; H. H.
Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>Native Races of the Pacific
States</hi>, ii. 142 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The supernatural powers attributed to
this pontiff are not specified, but probably they resembled
those of the Mikado and Chitomé.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The rules
of life
imposed
on kings in
early
society are
intended
to preserve
their lives
for the
good of
their
people.</note>
Wherever, as in Japan and West Africa, it is supposed
that the order of nature, and even the existence of the world,
is bound up with the life of the king or priest, it is clear
that he must be regarded by his subjects as a source both of
infinite blessing and of infinite danger. On the one hand,
the people have to thank him for the rain and sunshine
which foster the fruits of the earth, for the wind which
brings ships to their coasts, and even for the solid ground
beneath their feet. But what he gives he can refuse;
and so close is the dependence of nature on his person, so
delicate the balance of the system of forces whereof he is the
centre, that the least irregularity on his part may set up a
tremor which shall shake the earth to its foundations. And
if nature may be disturbed by the slightest involuntary act of
the king, it is easy to conceive the convulsion which his death
might provoke. The natural death of the Chitomé, as we
have seen, was thought to entail the destruction of all things.
Clearly, therefore, out of a regard for their own safety, which
might be imperilled by any rash act of the king, and still more
by his death, the people will exact of their king or priest
a strict conformity to those rules, the observance of which is
deemed necessary for his own preservation, and consequently
for the preservation of his people and the world. The idea
that early kingdoms are despotisms in which the people
exist only for the sovereign, is wholly inapplicable to the
monarchies we are considering. On the contrary, the
sovereign in them exists only for his subjects; his life is
only valuable so long as he discharges the duties of his
position by ordering the course of nature for his people's
benefit. So soon as he fails to do so, the care, the devotion,
the religious homage which they had hitherto lavished on
him cease and are changed into hatred and contempt; he is
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
dismissed ignominiously, and may be thankful if he escapes
with his life. Worshipped as a god one day, he is killed
as a criminal the next. But in this changed behaviour
of the people there is nothing capricious or inconsistent.
On the contrary, their conduct is entirely of a piece. If
their king is their god, he is or should be also their
preserver; and if he will not preserve them, he must
make room for another who will. So long, however, as
he answers their expectations, there is no limit to the
care which they take of him, and which they compel him to
take of himself. A king of this sort lives hedged in by a
ceremonious etiquette, a network of prohibitions and observances,
of which the intention is not to contribute to his
dignity, much less to his comfort, but to restrain him from
conduct which, by disturbing the harmony of nature, might
involve himself, his people, and the universe in one common
catastrophe. Far from adding to his comfort, these observances,
by trammelling his every act, annihilate his freedom
and often render the very life, which it is their object to
preserve, a burden and sorrow to him.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Taboos
observed
by African
kings.</note>
Of the supernaturally endowed kings of Loango it is
said that the more powerful a king is, the more taboos is he
bound to observe; they regulate all his actions, his walking
and his standing, his eating and drinking, his sleeping and
waking.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsche Expedition
an der Loango-Küste</hi>, i. 355.</note> To these restraints the heir to the throne is
subject from infancy; but as he advances in life the number
of abstinences and ceremonies which he must observe
increases, <q>until at the moment that he ascends the throne
he is lost in the ocean of rites and taboos.</q><note place='foot'>O. Dapper, <hi rend='italic'>Description de l'Afrique</hi>
(Amsterdam, 1686), p. 336.</note> In the crater
of an extinct volcano, enclosed on all sides by grassy slopes,
lie the scattered huts and yam-fields of Riabba, the capital
of the native king of Fernando Po. This mysterious being
lives in the lowest depths of the crater, surrounded by a
harem of forty women, and covered, it is said, with old silver
coins. Naked savage as he is, he yet exercises far more
influence in the island than the Spanish governor at Santa
Isabel. In him the conservative spirit of the Boobies or
aboriginal inhabitants of the island is, as it were, incorporate.
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
He has never seen a white man and, according to
the firm conviction of all the Boobies, the sight of a pale
face would cause his instant death. He cannot bear to look
upon the sea; indeed it is said that he may never see it
even in the distance, and that therefore he wears away his
life with shackles on his legs in the dim twilight of his hut.
Certain it is that he has never set foot on the beach. With
the exception of his musket and knife, he uses nothing that
comes from the whites; European cloth never touches his
person, and he scorns tobacco, rum, and even salt.<note place='foot'>O. Baumann, <hi rend='italic'>Eine afrikanische
Tropen-Insel, Fernando Póo und die
Bube</hi> (Wien und Olmütz, 1888), pp.
103 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Taboos
observed
by African
kings.
Prohibition
to see the
sea.</note>
Among the Ewe-speaking peoples of the Slave Coast, in
West Africa, <q>the king is at the same time high priest. In
this quality he was, particularly in former times, unapproachable
by his subjects. Only by night was he allowed to quit
his dwelling in order to bathe and so forth. None but his
representative, the so-called <q>visible king,</q> with three chosen
elders might converse with him, and even they had to sit on
an ox-hide with their backs turned to him. He might not
see any European nor any horse, nor might he look upon the
sea, for which reason he was not allowed to quit his capital
even for a few moments. These rules have been disregarded
in recent times.</q><note place='foot'>G. Zündel, <q>Land und Volk der
Eweer auf der Sclavenküste in Westafrika,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft für
Erdkunde zu Berlin</hi>, xii. (1877) p.
402.</note> The king of Dahomey himself is subject
to the prohibition of beholding the sea,<note place='foot'>Béraud, <q>Note sur le Dahomé,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</hi>
(Paris), Vme Série, xii. (1866) p. 377.</note> and so are the kings
of Loango<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsche Expedition
an der Loango-Küste</hi>, i. 263.</note> and Great Ardra in Guinea.<note place='foot'>Bosman's <q>Guinea,</q> in Pinkerton's
<hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, xvi. 500.</note> The sea is the
fetish of the Eyeos, to the north-west of Dahomey, and they
and their king are threatened with death by their priests if
ever they dare to look on it.<note place='foot'>A. Dalzell, <hi rend='italic'>History of Dahomey</hi>
(London, 1793), p. 15; Th. Winterbottom,
<hi rend='italic'>An Account of the Native
Africans in the Neighbourhood of Sierra
Leone</hi> (London, 1803), pp. 229 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> It is believed that the king
of Cayor in Senegal would infallibly die within the year if he
were to cross a river or an arm of the sea.<note place='foot'>J. B. L. Durand, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage au
Sénégal</hi> (Paris, 1802), p. 55.</note> In Mashonaland
down to recent times the chiefs would not cross certain
rivers, particularly the Rurikwi and the Nyadiri; and the
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
custom was still strictly observed by at least one chief
within the last few years. <q>On no account will the chief
cross the river. If it is absolutely necessary for him to do
so, he is blindfolded and carried across with shouting and
singing. Should he walk across, he will go blind or die and
certainly lose the chieftainship.</q><note place='foot'>W. S. Taberer (Chief Native
Commissioner for Mashonaland),
<q>Mashonaland Natives,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the African Society</hi>, No. 15 (April
1905). p. 320.</note> So among the Mahafalys
and Sakalavas in the south of Madagascar some kings are
forbidden to sail on the sea or to cross certain rivers.<note place='foot'>A. van Gennep, <hi rend='italic'>Tabou et totémisme
à Madagascar</hi> (Paris, 1904), p.
113.</note> The
horror of the sea is not peculiar to kings. The Basutos are said
to share it instinctively, though they have never seen salt water,
and live hundreds of miles from the Indian Ocean.<note place='foot'>Father Porte, <q>Les Reminiscences
d'un missionnaire du Basutoland,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Missions Catholiques</hi>, xxviii. (1896)
p. 235.</note> The
Egyptian priests loathed the sea, and called it the foam of
Typhon; they were forbidden to set salt on their table, and
they would not speak to pilots because they got their
living by the sea; hence too they would not eat fish, and
the hieroglyphic symbol for hatred was a fish.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 32.</note> When
the Indians of the Peruvian Andes were sent by the Spaniards
to work in the hot valleys of the coast, the vast ocean which
they saw before them as they descended the Cordillera was
dreaded by them as a cause of disease; hence they
prayed to it that they might not fall ill. This they all
did without exception, even the little children.<note place='foot'>P. J. de Arriaga, <hi rend='italic'>Extirpacion de
la idolatria del Piru</hi> (Lima, 1621), pp.
11, 132.</note> Similarly
the inland people of Lampong in Sumatra are said to
pay a kind of adoration to the sea, and to make it an
offering of cakes and sweetmeats when they behold it
for the first time, deprecating its power of doing them
mischief.<note place='foot'>W. Marsden, <hi rend='italic'>History of Sumatra</hi>
(London, 1811), p. 301.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Taboos
observed
by chiefs
among the
Sakalavas
and the
hill tribes
of Assam.</note>
Among the Sakalavas of southern Madagascar the chief
is regarded as a sacred being, but <q>he is held in leash by a
crowd of restrictions, which regulate his behaviour like that
of the emperor of China. He can undertake nothing whatever
unless the sorcerers have declared the omens favourable:
he may not eat warm food: on certain days he may not quit
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
his hut; and so on.</q><note place='foot'>A. van Gennep, <hi rend='italic'>Tabou et totémisme
à Madagascar</hi>, p. 113, quoting
De Thuy, <hi rend='italic'>Étude historique, géographique
et ethnographique sur la province
de Tuléar</hi>, Notes, Rec., Expl., 1899,
p. 104.</note> Among some of the hill tribes of
Assam both the headman and his wife have to observe many
taboos in respect of food; thus they may not eat buffalo,
pork, dog, fowl, or tomatoes. The headman must be chaste,
the husband of one wife, and he must separate himself from
her on the eve of a general or public observance of taboo.
In one group of tribes the headman is forbidden to eat in a
strange village, and under no provocation whatever may he
utter a word of abuse. Apparently the people imagine that
the violation of any of these taboos by a headman would
bring down misfortune on the whole village.<note place='foot'>T. C. Hodson, <q>The <foreign rend='italic'>genna</foreign>
amongst the Tribes of Assam,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxvi.
(1906) p. 98. The word for taboo
among these tribes is <foreign rend='italic'>genna</foreign>.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Taboos
observed
by Irish
kings.</note>
The ancient kings of Ireland, as well as the kings of the
four provinces of Leinster, Munster, Connaught, and Ulster,
were subject to certain quaint prohibitions or taboos, on the
due observance of which the prosperity of the people and
the country, as well as their own, was supposed to depend.
Thus, for example, the sun might not rise on the king of
Ireland in his bed at Tara, the old capital of Erin; he was
forbidden to alight on Wednesday at Magh Breagh, to
traverse Magh Cuillinn after sunset, to incite his horse at
Fan-Chomair, to go in a ship upon the water the Monday
after Bealltaine (May day), and to leave the track of his
army upon Ath Maighne the Tuesday after All-Hallows.
The king of Leinster might not go round Tuath Laighean
left-hand-wise on Wednesday, nor sleep between the Dothair
(Dodder) and the Duibhlinn<note place='foot'>The Duibhlinn is the part of the
Liffey on which Dublin now stands.</note> with his head inclining to one
side, nor encamp for nine days on the plains of Cualann, nor
travel the road of Duibhlinn on Monday, nor ride a dirty
black-heeled horse across Magh Maistean. The king of
Munster was prohibited from enjoying the feast of Loch
Lein from one Monday to another; from banqueting by
night in the beginning of harvest before Geim at Leitreacha;
from encamping for nine days upon the Siuir; and from
holding a border meeting at Gabhran. The king of
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
Connaught might not conclude a treaty respecting his ancient
palace of Cruachan<note place='foot'>The site, marked by the remains
of some earthen forts, is now known as
Rathcroghan, near Belanagare in the
county of Roscommon.</note> after making peace on All-Hallows
Day, nor go in a speckled garment on a grey speckled steed
to the heath of Dal Chais, nor repair to an assembly of
women at Seaghais, nor sit in autumn on the sepulchral
mounds of the wife of Maine, nor contend in running with
the rider of a grey one-eyed horse at Ath Gallta between
two posts. The king of Ulster was forbidden to attend the
horse fair at Rath Line among the youths of Dal Araidhe,
to listen to the fluttering of the flocks of birds of Linn
Saileach after sunset, to celebrate the feast of the bull of
Daire-mic-Daire, to go into Magh Cobha in the month of
March, and to drink of the water of Bo Neimhidh between
two darknesses. If the kings of Ireland strictly observed
these and many other customs, which were enjoined by
immemorial usage, it was believed that they would never
meet with mischance or misfortune, and would live for ninety
years without experiencing the decay of old age; that no
epidemic or mortality would occur during their reigns; and
that the seasons would be favourable and the earth yield its
fruit in abundance; whereas, if they set the ancient usages
at naught, the country would be visited with plague, famine,
and bad weather.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Book of Rights</hi>, edited with
translation and notes by John O'Donovan
(Dublin, 1847), pp. 3-8. This
work, comprising a list both of the
prohibitions (<foreign rend='italic'>urgharta</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>geasa</foreign>) and
the prerogatives (<foreign rend='italic'>buadha</foreign>) of the Irish
kings, is preserved in a number of
manuscripts, of which the two oldest
date from 1390 and about 1418 respectively.
The list is repeated twice,
first in prose and then in verse. I
have to thank my friend Professor Sir J.
Rhys for kindly calling my attention to
this interesting record of a long-vanished
past in Ireland. As to these taboos,
see P. W. Joyce, <hi rend='italic'>Social History of
Ancient Ireland</hi>, i. 310 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Taboos
observed
by
Egyptian
kings.</note>
The kings of Egypt were worshipped as gods,<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, vol. i. pp. 418 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> and
the routine of their daily life was regulated in every detail
by precise and unvarying rules. <q>The life of the kings
of Egypt,</q> says Diodorus, <q>was not like that of other
monarchs who are irresponsible and may do just what
they choose; on the contrary, everything was fixed for them
by law, not only their official duties, but even the details of
their daily life.... The hours both of day and night were
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
arranged at which the king had to do, not what he pleased,
but what was prescribed for him.... For not only were
the times appointed at which he should transact public
business or sit in judgment; but the very hours for his
walking and bathing and sleeping with his wife, and, in
short, performing every act of life were all settled. Custom
enjoined a simple diet; the only flesh he might eat was veal
and goose, and he might only drink a prescribed quantity of
wine.</q><note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, i. 70.</note> However, there is reason to think that these rules
were observed, not by the ancient Pharaohs, but by the
priestly kings who reigned at Thebes and in Ethiopia
at the close of the twentieth dynasty.<note place='foot'>G. Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire ancienne des
peuples de l'Orient classique</hi>, ii. 759,
note <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>; A. Moret, <hi rend='italic'>Du caractère religieux
de la royauté Pharaonique</hi>
(Paris, 1902), pp. 314-318.</note> Among the
Karen-nis of Upper Burma a chief attains his position,
not by hereditary right, but on account of his habit of
abstaining from rice and liquor. The mother, too, of a
candidate for the chieftainship must have eschewed these
things and lived solely on yams and potatoes so long as
she was with child. During that time she may not eat any
meat nor drink water from a common well. And if her son
is to be qualified for the office of chief he must continue to
observe these habits.<note place='foot'>(Sir) J. G. Scott, <hi rend='italic'>Gazetteer of Upper
Burma and the Shan States</hi>, part ii.
vol. i. (Rangoon, 1901) p. 308.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Taboos
observed
by the
Flamen
Dialis at
Rome.</note>
Of the taboos imposed on priests we may see a striking
example in the rules of life prescribed for the Flamen Dialis
at Rome, who has been interpreted as a living image of
Jupiter, or a human embodiment of the sky-spirit.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, vol. ii. pp. 191 sq.</note>
They were such as the following:&mdash;The Flamen Dialis
might not ride or even touch a horse, nor see an army
under arms,<note place='foot'>Among the Gallas the king, who
also acts as priest by performing sacrifices,
is the only man who is not
allowed to fight with weapons; he
may not even ward off a blow. See Ph.
Paulitschke, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographie Nordost-Afrikas:
die geistige Cultur der Danâkil,
Galla und Somâl</hi>, p. 136.</note> nor wear a ring which was not broken, nor
have a knot on any part of his garments; no fire except
a sacred fire might be taken out of his house; he might
not touch wheaten flour or leavened bread; he might
not touch or even name a goat, a dog,<note place='foot'>Among the Kafirs of the Hindoo
Koosh men who are preparing to be
headmen are considered ceremonially
pure, and wear a semi-sacred uniform
which must not be defiled by coming
into contact with dogs. <q>The Kaneash
[persons in this state of ceremonial
purity] were nervously afraid of my
dogs, which had to be fastened up
whenever one of these august personages
was seen to approach. The
dressing has to be performed with the
greatest care, in a place which cannot
be defiled with dogs. Utah and
another had convenient dressing-rooms
on the top of their houses which
happened to be high and isolated, but
another of the four Kaneash had been
compelled to erect a curious-looking
square pen made of poles in front of
his house, his own roof being a common
thoroughfare</q> (Sir George Scott
Robertson, <hi rend='italic'>The Kafirs of the Hindu
Kush</hi> (London, 1898), p. 466).</note> raw meat,
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
beans,<note place='foot'>Similarly the Egyptian priests
abstained from beans and would not
even look at them. See Herodotus,
ii. 37, with A. Wiedemann's note;
Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 5.</note> and ivy; he might not walk under a vine; the feet of
his bed had to be daubed with mud; his hair could be cut
only by a free man and with a bronze knife, and his hair
and nails when cut had to be buried under a lucky tree; he
might not touch a dead body nor enter a place where one
was burned;<note place='foot'>Similarly among the Kafirs of the
Hindoo Koosh the high priest <q>may
not traverse certain paths which go
near the receptacles for the dead, nor
may he visit the cemeteries. He may
not go into the actual room where a
death has occurred until after an effigy
has been erected for the deceased.
Slaves may cross his threshold, but
must not approach the hearth</q> (Sir
George Scott Robertson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p.
416).</note> he might not see work being done on holy
days; he might not be uncovered in the open air; if a man
in bonds were taken into his house, the captive had to be
unbound and the cords had to be drawn up through a hole
in the roof and so let down into the street. His wife, the
Flaminica, had to observe nearly the same rules, and others
of her own besides. She might not ascend more than three
steps of the kind of staircase called Greek; at a certain
festival she might not comb her hair; the leather of her
shoes might not be made from a beast that had died a
natural death, but only from one that had been slain or
sacrificed; if she heard thunder she was tabooed till she had
offered an expiatory sacrifice.<note place='foot'>Aulus Gellius, x. 15; Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Quaest, Rom.</hi> 109-112; Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat.
Hist.</hi> xxviii. 146; Servius on Virgil,
<hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> i. 179, 448, iv. 518; Macrobius,
<hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi> i. 16. 8 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Festus, p.
161 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>, ed. C. O. Müller. For more
details see J. Marquardt, <hi rend='italic'>Römische
Staatsverwaltung</hi>, iii.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 326 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Taboos
observed
by the
Bodia of
Sierra
Leone.</note>
Among the Grebo people of Sierra Leone there is a
pontiff who bears the title of Bodia and has been compared,
on somewhat slender grounds, to the high priest of the Jews.
He is appointed in accordance with the behest of an oracle.
At an elaborate ceremony of installation he is anointed, a
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
ring is put on his ankle as a badge of office, and the door-posts
of his house are sprinkled with the blood of a sacrificed
goat. He has charge of the public talismans and idols, which
he feeds with rice and oil every new moon; and he sacrifices
on behalf of the town to the dead and to demons. Nominally
his power is very great, but in practice it is very limited;
for he dare not defy public opinion, and he is held responsible,
even with his life, for any adversity that befalls the
country. It is expected of him that he should cause the
earth to bring forth abundantly, the people to be healthy,
war to be driven far away, and witchcraft to be kept in
abeyance. His life is trammelled by the observance of
certain restrictions or taboos. Thus he may not sleep in
any house but his own official residence, which is called the
<q>anointed house</q> with reference to the ceremony of anointing
him at inauguration. He may not drink water on the
highway. He may not eat while a corpse is in the town,
and he may not mourn for the dead. If he dies while in
office, he must be buried at dead of night; few may hear of
his burial, and none may mourn for him when his death is
made public. Should he have fallen a victim to the poison
ordeal by drinking a decoction of sassywood, as it is called,
he must be buried under a running stream of water.<note place='foot'>Sir Harry Johnston, <hi rend='italic'>Liberia</hi> (London,
1906), ii. 1076 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, quoting from
Bishop Payne, who wrote <q>some fifty
years ago.</q> The Bodia described by
Bishop Payne is clearly identical with
the Bodio of the Grain Coast who is
described by the Rev. J. L. Wilson
(<hi rend='italic'>Western Africa</hi>, pp. 129 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>). See
below, p. 23; and <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and
the Evolution of Kings</hi>, vol. i. p. 353.
As to the iron ring which the pontiff
wears on his ankle as the badge of his
office we are told that it <q>is regarded
with as much veneration as the most
ancient crown in Europe, and the incumbent
suffers as deep disgrace by its removal
as any monarch in Europe
would by being deprived of his crown</q>
(J. L. Wilson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 129 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Taboos
observed
by sacred
milkmen
among the
Todas
of South
India.</note>
Among the Todas of Southern India the holy milkman
(<foreign rend='italic'>palol</foreign>), who acts as priest of the sacred dairy, is subject to a
variety of irksome and burdensome restrictions during the
whole time of his incumbency, which may last many years.
Thus he must live at the sacred dairy and may never visit
his home or any ordinary village. He must be celibate; if
he is married he must leave his wife. On no account may
any ordinary person touch the holy milkman or the holy
dairy; such a touch would so defile his holiness that he
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
would forfeit his office. It is only on two days a week,
namely Mondays and Thursdays, that a mere layman may
even approach the milkman; on other days if he has any
business with him, he must stand at a distance (some say a
quarter of a mile) and shout his message across the intervening
space. Further, the holy milkman never cuts his
hair or pares his nails so long as he holds office; he never
crosses a river by a bridge, but wades through a ford and
only certain fords; if a death occurs in his clan, he may not
attend any of the funeral ceremonies, unless he first resigns
his office and descends from the exalted rank of milkman to
that of a mere common mortal. Indeed it appears that in
old days he had to resign the seals, or rather the pails, of
office whenever any member of his clan departed this life.
However, these heavy restraints are laid in their entirety
only on milkmen of the very highest class.<note place='foot'>W. H. R. Rivers, <hi rend='italic'>The Todas</hi> (London,
1906), pp. 98-103.</note> Among the
Todas there are milkmen and milkmen; and some of them
get off more lightly in consideration of their humbler
station in life.<note place='foot'>For restrictions imposed on these
lesser milkmen see W. H. R. Rivers,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 62, 66, 67 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 72, 73,
79-81.</note> Still, apart from the dignity they enjoy, the
lot even of these other milkmen is not altogether a happy
one. Thus, for example, at a place called Kanodrs there is
a dairy-temple of a conical form. The milkman who has
charge of it must be celibate during the tenure of his office:
he must sleep in the calves' house, a very flimsy structure
with an open door and a fire-place that gives little heat: he
may wear only one very scanty garment: he must take his
meals sitting on the outer wall which surrounds the dairy:
in eating he may not put his hand to his lips, but must throw
the food into his mouth; and in drinking he may not put to
his lips the leaf which serves as a cup, he must tilt his head
back and pour the liquid into his mouth in a jet from above.
With the exception of a single layman, who is allowed to
bear the milkman company, but who is also bound to celibacy
and has a bed rigged up for him in the calves' house,
no other person is allowed to go near this very sacred dairy
under any pretext whatever. No wonder that some years
ago the dairy was unoccupied and the office of milkman
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
stood vacant. <q>At the present time,</q> says Dr. Rivers, <q>a
dairyman is appointed about once a year and holds office
for thirty or forty days only. So far as I could ascertain,
the failure to occupy the dairy constantly is due to the very
considerable hardships and restrictions which have to be
endured by the holder of the office of dairyman, and the
time is probably not far distant when this dairy, one of the
most sacred among the Todas, will cease altogether to be
used.</q><note place='foot'>W. H. R. Rivers, <hi rend='italic'>The Todas</hi>, pp.
79-81.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. Divorce of the Spiritual from the Temporal Power.'/>
<head>§ 2. Divorce of the Spiritual from the Temporal Power.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The effect
of these
burdensome
rules
was to
divorce the
temporal
from the
spiritual
authority.</note>
The burdensome observances attached to the royal or
priestly office produced their natural effect. Either men
refused to accept the office, which hence tended to fall into
abeyance; or accepting it, they sank under its weight into
spiritless creatures, cloistered recluses, from whose nerveless
fingers the reins of government slipped into the firmer grasp
of men who were often content to wield the reality of
sovereignty without its name. In some countries this rift
in the supreme power deepened into a total and permanent
separation of the spiritual and temporal powers, the old
royal house retaining their purely religious functions, while
the civil government passed into the hands of a younger
and more vigorous race.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Reluctance
to accept
sovereignty
with its
vexatious
restrictions.</note>
To take examples. In a previous part of this work
we saw that in Cambodia it is often necessary to force
the kingships of Fire and Water upon the reluctant successors,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art</hi>, vol. ii. p. 4.</note>
and that in Savage Island the monarchy actually
came to an end because at last no one could be induced
to accept the dangerous distinction.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi> vol. i. pp. 354 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In some parts
of West Africa, when the king dies, a family council is
secretly held to determine his successor. He on whom
the choice falls is suddenly seized, bound, and thrown
into the fetish-house, where he is kept in durance till he
consents to accept the crown. Sometimes the heir finds
means of evading the honour which it is sought to thrust
upon him; a ferocious chief has been known to go about
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
constantly armed, resolute to resist by force any attempt to
set him on the throne.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsche Expedition
an der Loango-Küste</hi>, i. 354 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii.
9, 11.</note> The savage Timmes of Sierra
Leone, who elect their king, reserve to themselves the right
of beating him on the eve of his coronation; and they avail
themselves of this constitutional privilege with such hearty
goodwill that sometimes the unhappy monarch does not
long survive his elevation to the throne. Hence when the
leading chiefs have a spite at a man and wish to rid themselves
of him, they elect him king.<note place='foot'>Zweifel et Moustier, <q>Voyage aux
sources du Niger,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de la Société
de Géographie</hi> (Paris), VIme Série,
xx. (1880) p. 111.</note> Formerly, before a
man was proclaimed king of Sierra Leone, it used to be the
custom to load him with chains and thrash him. Then the
fetters were knocked off, the kingly robe was placed on him,
and he received in his hands the symbol of royal dignity,
which was nothing but the axe of the executioner.<note place='foot'>O. Dapper, <hi rend='italic'>Description de l'Afrique</hi>
(Amsterdam, 1686), p. 250.</note> It is
not therefore surprising to read that in Sierra Leone, where
such customs have prevailed, <q>except among the Mandingoes
and Suzees, few kings are natives of the countries they
govern. So different are their ideas from ours, that very
few are solicitous of the honour, and competition is very
seldom heard of.</q><note place='foot'>J. Matthews, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage to Sierra-Leone</hi>
(London, 1791), p. 75.</note> Another writer on Sierra Leone tells
us that <q>the honour of reigning, so much coveted in Europe,
is very frequently rejected in Africa, on account of the
expense attached to it, which sometimes greatly exceeds
the revenues of the crown.</q><note place='foot'>T. Winterbottom, <hi rend='italic'>Account of the
Native Africans in the Neighbourhood
of Sierra Leone</hi> (London, 1803),
p. 124.</note> A reluctance to accept the
sovereignty in the Ethiopian kingdom of Gingiro was
simulated, if not really felt, as we learn from the old Jesuit
missionaries. <q>They wrap up the dead king's body in
costly garments, and killing a cow, put it into the hide;
then all those who hope to succeed him, being his sons or
others of the royal blood, flying from the honour they covet,
abscond and hide themselves in the woods. This done, the
electors, who are all great sorcerers, agree among themselves
who shall be king, and go out to seek him, when entering
the woods by means of their enchantments, they say, a large
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
bird called <foreign rend='italic'>liber</foreign>, as big as an eagle, comes down with mighty
cries over the place where he is hid, and they find him
encompass'd by lyons, tygers, snakes, and other creatures
gather'd about him by witchcraft. The elect, as fierce as
those beasts, rushes out upon those who seek him, wounding
and sometimes killing some of them, to prevent being seiz'd.
They take all in good part, defending themselves the best
they can, till they have seiz'd him. Thus they carry him
away by force, he still struggling and seeming to refuse
taking upon him the burthen of government, all which is
mere cheat and hypocrisy.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Travels of the Jesuits in
Ethiopia</hi>, collected and historically
digested by F. Balthazar Tellez
(London, 1710), pp. 197 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sovereign
powers
divided
between a
temporal
and a
spiritual
head.</note>
The Mikados of Japan seem early to have resorted to
the expedient of transferring the honours and burdens of
supreme power to their infant children; and the rise of the
Tycoons, long the temporal sovereigns of the country, is
traced to the abdication of a certain Mikado in favour of
his three-year-old son. The sovereignty having been
wrested by a usurper from the infant prince, the cause of
the Mikado was championed by Yoritomo, a man of spirit
and conduct, who overthrew the usurper and restored
to the Mikado the shadow, while he retained for himself
the substance, of power. He bequeathed to his descendants
the dignity he had won, and thus became the founder of the
line of Tycoons. Down to the latter half of the sixteenth
century the Tycoons were active and efficient rulers; but the
same fate overtook them which had befallen the Mikados.
Immeshed in the same inextricable web of custom and law,
they degenerated into mere puppets, hardly stirring from
their palaces and occupied in a perpetual round of empty
ceremonies, while the real business of government was
managed by the council of state.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Manners and Customs of the
Japanese</hi>, pp. 199 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 355 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In Tonquin the monarchy
ran a similar course. Living like his predecessors in
effeminacy and sloth, the king was driven from the throne
by an ambitious adventurer named Mack, who from a
fisherman had risen to be Grand Mandarin. But the king's
brother Tring put down the usurper and restored the king,
retaining, however, for himself and his descendants the
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
dignity of general of all the forces. Thenceforward the
kings or <foreign rend='italic'>dovas</foreign>, though invested with the title and pomp of
sovereignty, ceased to govern. While they lived secluded
in their palaces, all real political power was wielded by the
hereditary generals or <foreign rend='italic'>chovas</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Richard, <q>History of Tonquin,</q>
in Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, ix.
744 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The present king of Sikhim,
<q>like most of his predecessors in the kingship, is a mere
puppet in the hands of his crafty priests, who have made
a sort of priest-king of him. They encourage him by
every means in their power to leave the government to
them, whilst he devotes all his time to the degrading rites
of devil-worship, and the ceaseless muttering of meaningless
jargon, of which the Tibetan form of Buddhism chiefly
consists. They declare that he is a saint by birth, that he
is the direct descendant of the greatest king of Tibet, the
canonised Srongtsan Gampo, who was a contemporary of
Mahomed in the seventh century <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> and who first introduced
Buddhism to Tibet.</q> <q>This saintly lineage, which
secures for the king's person popular homage amounting to
worship, is probably, however, a mere invention of the
priests to glorify their puppet-prince for their own sordid
ends. Such devices are common in the East.</q><note place='foot'>L. A. Waddell, <hi rend='italic'>Among the Himalayas</hi>
(Westminster, 1899), pp. 146 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The
custom regularly observed by the Tahitian kings of abdicating
on the birth of a son, who was immediately proclaimed
sovereign and received his father's homage, may
perhaps have originated, like the similar custom occasionally
practised by the Mikados, in a wish to shift to other
shoulders the irksome burden of royalty; for in Tahiti as
elsewhere the sovereign was subjected to a system of
vexatious restrictions.<note place='foot'>W. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>Polynesian Researches</hi>,
Second Edition (London, 1832-1836),
iii. 99 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In Mangaia, another Polynesian
island, religious and civil authority were lodged in separate
hands, spiritual functions being discharged by a line of
hereditary kings, while the temporal government was entrusted
from time to time to a victorious war-chief, whose
investiture, however, had to be completed by the king. To
the latter were assigned the best lands, and he received
daily offerings of the choicest food.<note place='foot'>W. W. Gill, <hi rend='italic'>Myths and Songs of
the South Pacific</hi>, pp. 293 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The Mikado and
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
Tycoon of Japan had their counterparts in the Roko Tui
and Vunivalu of Fiji. The Roko Tui was the Reverend
or Sacred King. The Vunivalu was the Root of War or
War King. In one kingdom a certain Thakambau, who
was the War King, kept all power in his own hands, but in
a neighbouring kingdom the real ruler was the Sacred
King.<note place='foot'>The late Rev. Lorimer Fison, in a
letter to the author, dated August 26,
1898.</note> Similarly in Tonga, besides the civil king or <foreign rend='italic'>How</foreign>,
whose right to the throne was partly hereditary and partly
derived from his warlike reputation and the number of his
fighting men, there was a great divine chief called <foreign rend='italic'>Tooitonga</foreign>
or <q>Chief of Tonga,</q> who ranked above the king and the
other chiefs in virtue of his supposed descent from one of the
chief gods. Once a year the first-fruits of the ground were
offered to him at a solemn ceremony, and it was believed
that if these offerings were not made the vengeance of the
gods would fall in a signal manner on the people. Peculiar
forms of speech, such as were applied to no one else, were
used in speaking of him, and everything that he chanced to
touch became sacred or tabooed. When he and the king
met, the monarch had to sit down on the ground in token
of respect until his holiness had passed by. Yet though he
enjoyed the highest veneration by reason of his divine
origin, this sacred personage possessed no political
authority, and if he ventured to meddle with affairs of
state it was at the risk of receiving a rebuff from the
king, to whom the real power belonged, and who finally
succeeded in ridding himself of his spiritual rival.<note place='foot'>W. Mariner, <hi rend='italic'>An Account of the
Natives of the Tonga Islands</hi>, Second
Edition (London, 1818), ii. 75-79,
132-136.</note> The
king of the Getae regularly shared his power with a
priest, whom his subjects called a god. This divine man
led a solitary life in a cave on a holy mountain, seeing
few people but the king and his attendants. His counsels
added much to the king's influence with his subjects, who
believed that he was thereby enabled to impart to them the
commands and admonitions of the gods.<note place='foot'>Strabo, vii. 3. 5, pp. 297 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> vii. 3. 11, p. 304.</note> At Athens the
kings degenerated into little more than sacred functionaries
and it is said that the institution of the new office of
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
Polemarch or War Lord was rendered necessary by their
growing effeminacy.<note place='foot'>Aristotle, <hi rend='italic'>Constitution of Athens</hi>,
iii. 2. My friend Professor Henry
Jackson kindly called my attention
to this passage.</note> American examples of the partition
of authority between a king and a pope have already been
cited from the early history of Mexico and Colombia.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, vol. i. p. 416, and above,
p. 6.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Fetish
kings and
civil kings
in West
Africa.</note>
In some parts of western Africa two kings reign side by
side, a fetish or religious king and a civil king, but the
fetish king is really supreme. He controls the weather and
so forth, and can put a stop to everything. When he lays
his red staff on the ground, no one may pass that way. This
division of power between a sacred and a secular ruler is
to be met with wherever the true negro culture has been
left unmolested, but where the negro form of society has
been disturbed, as in Dahomey and Ashantee, there is a
tendency to consolidate the two powers in a single
king.<note place='foot'>Miss Mary H. Kingsley in <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxix.
(1899) pp. 61 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> I had some conversation
on this subject with Miss
Kingsley (1st June 1897) and have
embodied the results in the text. Miss
Kingsley did not know the rule of
succession among the fetish kings.</note> Thus, for example, there used to be a fetish king
at New Calabar who ranked above the ordinary king in
all native matters, whether religious or civil, and always
walked in front of him on public occasions, attended by a
slave who held an umbrella over his head. His opinion
carried great weight.<note place='foot'>T. J. Hutchinson, <hi rend='italic'>Impressions of
Western Africa</hi> (London, 1858), pp.
101 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Le Comte C. N. de Cardi,
<q>Ju-ju Laws and Customs in the Niger
Delta,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxix. (1899) p. 51.</note> The office and the causes which led
to its extinction are thus described by a missionary who
spent many years in Calabar: <q>The worship of the people
is now given especially to their various <foreign rend='italic'>idems</foreign>, one of which,
called Ndem Efik, is a sort of tutelary deity of the country.
An individual was appointed to take charge of this object
of worship, who bore the name of King Calabar; and
likely, in bypast times, possessed the power indicated by the
title, being both king and priest. He had as a tribute the
skins of all leopards killed, and should a slave take refuge
in his shrine he belonged to Ndem Efik. The office, however,
imposed certain restrictions on its occupant. He, for
instance, could not partake of food in the presence of
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
any one, and he was prohibited from engaging in traffic.
On account of these and other disabilities, when the last
holder of the office died, a poor old man of the Cobham
family, no successor was found for him, and the priesthood
has become extinct.</q><note place='foot'>H. Goldie, <hi rend='italic'>Calabar and its Mission</hi>,
New Edition (London, 1901),
P. 43.</note> One of the practical inconveniences
of such an office is that the house of the fetish king enjoys
the right of sanctuary, and so tends to become little better
than a rookery of bad characters. Thus on the Grain
Coast of West Africa the fetish king or Bodio, as he is
called, <q>exercises the functions of a high-priest, and is
regarded as protector of the whole nation. He lives in a
house provided for him by the people, and takes care of the
national fetiches. He enjoys some immunities in virtue of
his office, but is subject to certain restrictions which more
than counterbalance his privileges. His house is a sanctum
to which culprits may betake themselves without the
danger of being removed by any one except by the Bodio
himself.</q><note place='foot'>J. L. Wilson, <hi rend='italic'>Western Africa</hi>
(London, 1856), p. 129. As to the
taboos observed by the Bodio or Bodia
see above, p. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>.</note> One of these Bodios resigned office because of the
sort of people who quartered themselves on him, the cost
of feeding them, and the squabbles they had among themselves.
He led a cat-and-dog life with them for three years.
Then there came a man with homicidal mania varied by
epileptic fits; and soon afterwards the spiritual shepherd
retired into private life, but not before he had lost an ear
and sustained other bodily injury in a personal conflict with
this very black sheep.<note place='foot'>Miss Mary H. Kingsley, in
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxix. (1899) p. 62.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The King
of the
Night.</note>
At Porto Novo there used to be, in addition to the
ordinary monarch, a King of the Night, who reigned during
the hours of darkness from sunset to sunrise. He might not
shew himself in the street after the sun was up. His duty
was to patrol the streets with his satellites and to arrest all
whom he found abroad after a certain hour. Each band of
his catchpoles was led by a man who went about concealed
from head to foot under a conical casing of straw and blew
blasts on a shell which caused every one that heard it to
shudder. The King of the Night never met the ordinary
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
king except on the first and last days of their respective
reign; for each of them invested the other with office and
paid him the last honours at death.<note place='foot'>Marchoux, <q>Ethnographie, Porto-Novo,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Revue Scientifique</hi>, Quatrième
Série, iii. (1895) pp. 595 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> This
passage was pointed out to me by
Mr. N. W. Thomas.</note> With this King of
the Night at Porto Novo we may compare a certain king of
Hawaii who was so very sacred that no man might see
him, even accidentally, by day under pain of death; he
only shewed himself by night.<note place='foot'>O. von Kotzebue, <hi rend='italic'>Entdeckungs-Reise
in die Süd-See und nach der
Berings-Strasse</hi> (Weimar, 1821), iii.
149.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Civil rajahs
and taboo
rajahs in
the East
Indies.</note>
In some parts of the East Indian island of Timor we
meet with a partition of power like that which is represented
by the civil king and the fetish king of western
Africa. Some of the Timorese tribes recognise two rajahs,
the ordinary or civil rajah, who governs the people, and
the fetish or taboo rajah (<foreign rend='italic'>radja pomali</foreign>), who is charged
with the control of everything that concerns the earth
and its products. This latter ruler has the right of
declaring anything taboo; his permission must be obtained
before new land may be brought under cultivation, and he
must perform certain necessary ceremonies when the work
is being carried out. If drought or blight threatens the
crops, his help is invoked to save them. Though he ranks
below the civil rajah, he exercises a momentous influence on
the course of events, for his secular colleague is bound to
consult him in all important matters. In some of the
neighbouring islands, such as Rotti and eastern Flores, a
spiritual ruler of the same sort is recognised under various
native names, which all mean <q>lord of the ground.</q><note place='foot'>J. J. de Hollander, <hi rend='italic'>Handleiding
bij de Beofening der Land- en Volkenkunde
van Nederlandsch Oost-Indië</hi>,
ii. 606 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> In other parts of Timor
the spiritual ruler is called <foreign rend='italic'>Anaha paha</foreign>
or <q>conjuror of the land.</q> Compare
H. Zondervan, <q>Timor en de Timoreezen,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch
Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</hi>,
Tweede Serie, v. (1888) Afdeeling, mehr
uitgebreide artikelen, pp. 400-402.</note>
Similarly in the Mekeo district of British New Guinea
there is a double chieftainship. The people are divided
into two groups according to families, and each of the
groups has its chief. One of the two is the war chief, the
other is the taboo (<foreign rend='italic'>afu</foreign>) chief. The office of the latter is
hereditary; his duty is to impose a taboo on any of the
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
crops, such as the coco-nuts and areca nuts, whenever he
thinks it desirable to prohibit their use. In his office we
may perhaps detect the beginning of a priestly dynasty, but
as yet his functions appear to be more magical than
religious, being concerned with the control of the harvests
rather than with the propitiation of higher powers. The
members of another family are bound to see to it that the
taboo imposed by the chief is strictly observed. For this
purpose some fourteen or fifteen men of the family form
a sort of constabulary. Every evening they go round the
village armed with clubs and disguised with masks or leaves.
All the time they are in office they are forbidden to live
with their wives and even to look at a woman. Hence
women may not quit their houses while the men are going
their rounds. Further, the constables on duty are prohibited
from chewing betel nut and drinking coco-nut water,
lest the areca and coco-nuts should not grow. When there
is a good show of nuts, the taboo chief proclaims that on
a certain day the restriction will come to an end.<note place='foot'>A. C. Haddon, <hi rend='italic'>Head-hunters,
Black, White, and Brown</hi> (London,
1901), pp. 270-272.</note> In
Ponape, one of the Caroline Islands, the kingship is elective
within the limits of the blood royal, which runs in the
female line, so that the sovereignty passes backwards and
forwards between families which we, reckoning descent in
the male line, should regard as distinct. The chosen
monarch must be in possession of certain secrets. He must
know the places where the sacred stones are kept, on which
he has to seat himself. He must understand the holy
words and prayers of the liturgy, and after his election he
must recite them at the place of the sacred stones. But he
enjoys only the honours of his office; the real powers of
government are in the hands of his prime-minister or vizier.<note place='foot'>Dr. Hahl, <q>Mittheilungen über
Sitten und rechtliche Verhältnisse auf
Ponape,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Ethnologisches Notizblatt</hi>, ii.
Heft 2 (Berlin, 1901), pp. 5 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 7.
The title of the prime-minister is
<foreign rend='italic'>Nanekin</foreign>.</note>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. The Perils Of The Soul.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. The Soul as a Mannikin.'/>
<head>§ 1. The Soul as a Mannikin.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>What
is the
primitive
conception
of death?</note>
The foregoing examples have taught us that the office of
a sacred king or priest is often hedged in by a series of
burdensome restrictions or taboos, of which a principal
purpose appears to be to preserve the life of the divine man
for the good of his people. But if the object of the taboos
is to save his life, the question arises, How is their observance
supposed to effect this end? To understand this we
must know the nature of the danger which threatens the
king's life, and which it is the intention of these curious
restrictions to guard against. We must, therefore, ask:
What does early man understand by death? To what
causes does he attribute it? And how does he think
it may be guarded against?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Savages
conceive
the human
soul as a
mannikin,
the prolonged
absence of
which from
the body
causes
death.</note>
As the savage commonly explains the processes of
inanimate nature by supposing that they are produced by
living beings working in or behind the phenomena, so he
explains the phenomena of life itself. If an animal lives and
moves, it can only be, he thinks, because there is a little
animal inside which moves it: if a man lives and moves, it
can only be because he has a little man or animal inside who
moves him. The animal inside the animal, the man inside
the man, is the soul. And as the activity of an animal or
man is explained by the presence of the soul, so the repose
of sleep or death is explained by its absence; sleep or trance
being the temporary, death being the permanent absence of
the soul. Hence if death be the permanent absence of the
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
soul, the way to guard against it is either to prevent the soul
from leaving the body, or, if it does depart, to ensure that it
shall return. The precautions adopted by savages to secure
one or other of these ends take the form of certain prohibitions
or taboos, which are nothing but rules intended
to ensure either the continued presence or the return of the
soul. In short, they are life-preservers or life-guards. These
general statements will now be illustrated by examples.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The soul
as a mannikin
in
Australia,
America,
and among
the
Malays.</note>
Addressing some Australian blacks, a European missionary
said, <q>I am not one, as you think, but two.</q> Upon this
they laughed. <q>You may laugh as much as you like,</q>
continued the missionary, <q>I tell you that I am two in one;
this great body that you see is one; within that there is
another little one which is not visible. The great body dies,
and is buried, but the little body flies away when the great
one dies.</q> To this some of the blacks replied, <q>Yes, yes.
We also are two, we also have a little body within the breast.</q>
On being asked where the little body went after death, some
said it went behind the bush, others said it went into the sea,
and some said they did not know.<note place='foot'>R. Salvado, <hi rend='italic'>Mémoires historiques
sur l'Australie</hi> (Paris, 1854), p. 162;
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
vii. (1878) p. 282. In this edifying
catechism there is little to choose between
the savagery of the white man
and the savagery of the black.</note> The Hurons thought
that the soul had a head and body, arms and legs; in short,
that it was a complete little model of the man himself.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Relations des Jésuites</hi>, 1634, p. 17;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, 1636, p. 104; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, 1639, p. 43
(Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858).</note> The
Esquimaux believe that <q>the soul exhibits the same shape
as the body it belongs to, but is of a more subtle and ethereal
nature.</q><note place='foot'>H. Rink, <hi rend='italic'>Tales and Traditions of
the Eskimo</hi>, p. 36. The Esquimaux
of Bering Strait believe that every
man has several souls, and that two of
these souls are shaped exactly like the
body. See E. W. Nelson, <q>The
Eskimo about Bering Strait,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Eighteenth
Annual Report of the Bureau of
American Ethnology</hi>, part i. (Washington,
1899) p. 422.</note> According to the Nootkas of British Columbia
the soul has the shape of a tiny man; its seat is the crown
of the head. So long as it stands erect, its owner is hale and
hearty; but when from any cause it loses its upright position,
he loses his senses.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, in <hi rend='italic'>Sixth Report on the
North-Western Tribes of Canada</hi>, p.
44 (separate reprint from the <hi rend='italic'>Report
of the British Association for 1890</hi>).</note> Among the Indian tribes of the Lower
Fraser River, man is held to have four souls, of which the
principal one has the form of a mannikin, while the other
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
three are shadows of it.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, in <hi rend='italic'>Ninth Report on the
North-Western Tribes of Canada</hi>, p.
461 (<hi rend='italic'>Report of the British Association
for 1894</hi>).</note> The Malays conceive the human
soul (<foreign rend='italic'>semangat</foreign>) as a little man, mostly invisible and of the
bigness of a thumb, who corresponds exactly in shape, proportion,
and even in complexion to the man in whose body
he resides. This mannikin is of a thin unsubstantial nature,
though not so impalpable but that it may cause displacement
on entering a physical object, and it can flit quickly
from place to place; it is temporarily absent from the
body in sleep, trance, and disease, and permanently absent
after death.<note place='foot'>W. W. Skeat, <hi rend='italic'>Malay Magic</hi>
(London, 1900), p. 47.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The soul
as a mannikin
in
ancient
Egypt.</note>
The ancient Egyptians believed that every man has a soul
(<foreign rend='italic'>ka</foreign>) which is his exact counterpart or double, with the same
features, the same gait, even the same dress as the man himself.
Many of the monuments dating from the eighteenth
century onwards represent various kings appearing before
divinities, while behind the king stands his soul or double,
portrayed as a little man with the king's features. Some of
the reliefs in the temple at Luxor illustrate the birth of King
Amenophis III. While the queen-mother is being tended
by two goddesses acting as midwives, two other goddesses
are bringing away two figures of new-born children, only one
of which is supposed to be a child of flesh and blood: the
inscriptions engraved above their heads shew that, while the
first is Amenophis, the second is his soul or double. And
as with kings and queens, so it was with common men and
women. Whenever a child was born, there was born with
him a double which followed him through the various stages
of life; young while he was young, it grew to maturity and
declined along with him. And not only human beings, but
gods and animals, stones and trees, natural and artificial
objects, everybody and everything had its own soul or double.
The doubles of oxen and sheep were the duplicates of the
original oxen or sheep; the doubles of linen or beds, of
chairs or knives, had the same form as the real linen, beds,
chairs, and knives. So thin and subtle was the stuff, so fine
and delicate the texture of these doubles, that they made no
impression on ordinary eyes. Only certain classes of priests
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
or seers were enabled by natural gifts or special training to
perceive the doubles of the gods, and to win from them a
knowledge of the past and the future. The doubles of men
and things were hidden from sight in the ordinary course of
life; still, they sometimes flew out of the body endowed with
colour and voice, left it in a kind of trance, and departed to
manifest themselves at a distance.<note place='foot'>G. Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Études de mythologie
et d'archéologie égyptiennes</hi> (Paris,
1893), i. 388 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. Wiedemann,
<hi rend='italic'>The ancient Egyptian Doctrine of the
Immortality of the Soul</hi> (London, 1895),
pp. 10 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> In Greek works of art,
especially vase-paintings, the human
soul is sometimes represented as a tiny
being in human form, generally winged,
sometimes clothed and armed, sometimes
naked. See O. Jahn, <hi rend='italic'>Archäologische
Beiträge</hi> (Berlin, 1847), pp. 128
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; E. Pottier, <hi rend='italic'>Étude sur les lécythes
blancs attiques</hi> (Paris, 1883), pp. 75-79;
<hi rend='italic'>American Journal of Archaeology</hi>,
ii. (1886) pll. xii., xiii.; O. Kern, in
<hi rend='italic'>Aus der Anomia, Archäologische Beiträge
Carl Robert zur Erinnerung an
Berlin dargebracht</hi> (Berlin, 1890), pp.
89-95. Greek artists of a later period
sometimes portrayed the human soul in
the form of a butterfly (O. Jahn, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
pp. 138 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>). There was a particular sort
of butterfly to which the Greeks gave
the name of soul (ψυχή). See Aristotle,
<hi rend='italic'>Hist. anim.</hi> v. 19, p. 550 b 26, p.
551 b 13 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest.
conviv.</hi> ii. 3. 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The soul
as a mannikin
in
Nias, Fiji,
and India.</note>
So exact is the resemblance of the mannikin to the man,
in other words, of the soul to the body, that, as there are
fat bodies and thin bodies, so there are fat souls and thin
souls;<note place='foot'>W. W. Gill, <hi rend='italic'>Myths and Songs of
the South Pacific</hi> (London, 1876), p.
171.</note> as there are heavy bodies and light bodies, long bodies
and short bodies, so there are heavy souls and light souls, long
souls and short souls. The people of Nias (an island to the
west of Sumatra) think that every man, before he is born,
is asked how long or how heavy a soul he would like, and a
soul of the desired weight or length is measured out to him.
The heaviest soul ever given out weighs about ten grammes.
The length of a man's life is proportioned to the length of
his soul; children who die young had short souls.<note place='foot'>H. Sundermann, <q>Die Insel
Nias und die Mission daselbst,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Allgemeine
Missions-Zeitschrift</hi>, Bd. xi.
October 1884, p. 453.</note> The
Fijian conception of the soul as a tiny human being comes
clearly out in the customs observed at the death of a chief
among the Nakelo tribe. When a chief dies, certain men,
who are the hereditary undertakers, call him, as he lies, oiled
and ornamented, on fine mats, saying, <q>Rise, sir, the chief
and let us be going. The day has come over the land.</q>
Then they conduct him to the river side, where the ghostly
ferryman comes to ferry Nakelo ghosts across the stream
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
As they thus attend the chief on his last journey, they hold
their great fans close to the ground to shelter him, because,
as one of them explained to a missionary, <q>His soul is only
a little child.</q><note place='foot'>The late Rev. Lorimer Fison, in a
letter to the author, dated November
3, 1898.</note> People in the Punjaub who tattoo themselves
believe that at death the soul, <q>the little entire man
or woman</q> inside the mortal frame, will go to heaven
blazoned with the same tattoo patterns which adorned
the body in life.<note place='foot'>H. A. Rose, <q>Note on Female
Tattooing in the Panjâb,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Indian
Antiquary</hi>, xxxi. (1902) p. 298.</note> Sometimes, however, as we shall see,
the human soul is conceived not in human but in animal
form.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. Absense and Recall of the Soul.'/>
<head>§ 2. Absence and Recall of the Soul.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Attempts
to prevent
the soul
from
escaping
from the
body.</note>
The soul is commonly supposed to escape by the
natural openings of the body, especially the mouth and
nostrils. Hence in Celebes they sometimes fasten fishhooks
to a sick man's nose, navel, and feet, so that if his
soul should try to escape it may be hooked and held
fast.<note place='foot'>B. F. Matthes, <hi rend='italic'>Over de Bissoes of
heidensche priesters en priesteressen der
Boeginezen</hi> (Amsterdam, 1872), p. 24
(reprinted from the <hi rend='italic'>Verhandelingen der
Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen</hi>,
Afdeeling Letterkunde, Deel
vii.).</note> A Turik on the Baram River, in Borneo, refused to
part with some hook-like stones, because they, as it were,
hooked his soul to his body, and so prevented the spiritual
portion of him from becoming detached from the material.<note place='foot'>A. C. Haddon, <hi rend='italic'>Head-hunters</hi>, p.
439.</note>
When a Sea Dyak sorcerer or medicine-man is initiated,
his fingers are supposed to be furnished with fish-hooks,
with which he will thereafter clutch the human soul in
the act of flying away, and restore it to the body of the
sufferer.<note place='foot'>H. Ling Roth, <q>Low's Natives of
Borneo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxi. (1892) p. 115.</note> But hooks, it is plain, may be used to catch the
souls of enemies as well as of friends. Acting on this
principle head-hunters in Borneo hang wooden hooks beside
the skulls of their slain enemies in the belief that this helps
them on their forays to hook in fresh heads.<note place='foot'>A. C. Haddon, <hi rend='italic'>Head hunters</hi>, pp.
371, 396.</note> When an
epidemic is raging, the Goajiro Indians of Colombia attribute
it to an evil spirit, it may be the prowling ghost of an enemy.
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
So they hang strings furnished with hooks from the roofs of
their huts and from all the trees in the neighbourhood, in
order that the demon or ghost may be caught on a hook
and thus rendered powerless to harm them.<note place='foot'>H. Candelier, <hi rend='italic'>Rio-Hacha et les
Indiens Goajires</hi> (Paris, 1893), pp.
258 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Similarly the
Calchaquis Indians to the west of Paraguay used to plant
arrows in the ground about a sick man to keep death from
getting at him.<note place='foot'>R. Southey, <hi rend='italic'>History of Brazil</hi>, iii.
396.</note> One of the implements of a Haida medicine-man
is a hollow bone, in which he bottles up departing
souls, and so restores them to their owners.<note place='foot'>G. M. Dawson, <q>On the Haida
Indians of the Queen Charlotte Islands,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Geological Survey of Canada,
Report of Progress for 1878-1879</hi>
(Montreal, 1880), pp. 123 B, 139 B.</note> When any one
yawns in their presence the Hindoos always snap their
thumbs, believing that this will hinder the soul from issuing
through the open mouth.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, ii. p.
114, § 665.</note> The Marquesans used to hold
the mouth and nose of a dying man, in order to keep him in
life by preventing his soul from escaping;<note place='foot'>M. Radiguet, <hi rend='italic'>Les Derniers Sauvages</hi>
(Paris, 1882), p. 245; Matthias
G&mdash;&mdash;, <hi rend='italic'>Lettres sur Iles les Marquises</hi>
(Paris, 1843), p. 115; Clavel, <hi rend='italic'>Les
Marquisiens</hi>, p. 42 note.</note> the same custom
is reported of the New Caledonians;<note place='foot'>Gagnière, in <hi rend='italic'>Annales de la Propagation
de la Foi</hi>, xxxii. (1860) p.
439.</note> and with the like
intention the Bagobos of the Philippine Islands put rings of
brass wire on the wrists or ankles of their sick.<note place='foot'>F. Blumentritt, <q>Das Stromgebiet
des Rio Grande de Mindano,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Petermanns
Mitteilungen</hi>, xxxvii. (1891) p.
111.</note> On the
other hand, the Itonamas in South America seal up the
eyes, nose, and mouth of a dying person, in case his ghost
should get out and carry off others;<note place='foot'>A. d'Orbigny, <hi rend='italic'>L'Homme américain</hi>,
ii. 241; T. J. Hutchinson, <q>The
Chaco Indians,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the
Ethnological Society of London</hi>, N.S.,
iii. (1865) pp. 322 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. Bastian,
<hi rend='italic'>Culturländer des alten Amerika</hi>, i.
476. A similar custom is observed by
the Cayuvava Indians (A. d'Orbigny,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 257).</note> and for a similar
reason the people of Nias, who fear the spirits of the
recently deceased and identify them with the breath, seek to
confine the vagrant soul in its earthly tabernacle by bunging
up the nose or tying up the jaws of the corpse.<note place='foot'>E. Modigliani, <hi rend='italic'>Un Viaggio a Nías</hi>
(Milan, 1890), p. 283.</note> Before
leaving a corpse the Wakelbura in Australia used to place
hot coals in its ears in order to keep the ghost in the body,
until they had got such a good start that he could not
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
overtake them.<note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of
South-East Australia</hi> (London, 1904),
p. 473.</note> Esquimaux mourners plug their nostrils
with deerskin, hair, or hay for several days,<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, <q>The Central Eskimo,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Sixth Annual Report of the Bureau of
Ethnology</hi> (Washington, 1888), pp. 613
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Among the Esquimaux of Smith
Sound male mourners plug up the
right nostril and female mourners the
left (E. Bessels in <hi rend='italic'>American Naturalist</hi>,
xviii. (1884) p. 877; cp. J. Murdoch,
<q>Ethnological Results of the Point
Barrow Expedition,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Ninth Annual
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</hi>
(Washington, 1892), p. 425). This
seems to point to a belief that the soul
enters by one nostril and goes out by
the other, and that the functions
assigned to the right and left nostrils
in this respect are reversed in men and
women. Among the Esquimaux of
Baffin land <q>the person who prepares
a body for burial puts rabbit's fur into
his nostrils to prevent the exhalations
from entering his own lungs</q> (Fr.
Boas, <q>The Eskimo of Baffin Land
and Hudson Bay,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin of the
American Museum of Natural History</hi>,
xv. part i. (1901) p. 144). But this
would hardly explain the custom of
stopping one nostril only.</note> probably to
prevent their souls from following that of their departed
friend; the custom is especially incumbent on the persons
who dress the corpse.<note place='foot'>G. F. Lyon, <hi rend='italic'>Private Journal</hi>
(London, 1824), p. 370.</note> In southern Celebes, to hinder
the escape of a woman's soul at childbirth, the nurse
ties a band as tightly as possible round the body
of the expectant mother.<note place='foot'>B. F. Matthes, <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot
de Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes</hi> (The
Hague, 1875), p. 54.</note> The Minangkabauers of
Sumatra observe a similar custom; a skein of thread or a
string is sometimes fastened round the wrist or loins of a
woman in childbed, so that when her soul seeks to depart
in her hour of travail it may find the egress barred.<note place='foot'>J. L. van der Toorn, <q>Het
animisme bij den Minangkabauer der
Padangsche Bovenlanden,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde
van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>, xxxix. (1890)
p. 56.</note>
Among the Kayans of Borneo illness is attributed to
the absence of the soul; so when a man has been ill and
is well again, he attempts to prevent his soul from departing
afresh. For this purpose he ties the truant into his body
by fastening round his wrist a piece of string on which a
<foreign rend='italic'>lukut</foreign>, or antique bead, is threaded; for a magical virtue
appears to be ascribed to such beads. But lest the string
and the bead should be broken and lost, he will sometimes
tattoo the pattern of the bead on his wrist, and this is found
to answer the purpose of tethering his soul quite as well.<note place='foot'>C. Hose and R. Shelford, <q>Materials
for a Study of Tatu in Borneo,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxvi. (1906) p. 65.</note>
Again, the Koryak of North-Eastern Asia fancy that if
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
there are two sick people in a house and one of them is at
the last extremity, the soul of the other is apt to be lured
away by the soul of the dying man; hence in order to
hinder its departure they tie the patient's neck by a string
to the bands of the sleeping-tent and recite a charm over
the string so that it may be sure to detain the soul.<note place='foot'>W. Jochelson, <q>The Koryak,
Religion and Myths</q> (Leyden and
New York, 1905), p. 103 (<hi rend='italic'>Memoir
of the American Museum of Natural
History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</hi>,
vol. vi. part i.).</note> And
lest the soul of a babe should escape and be lost as
soon as it is born, the Alfoors of Celebes, when a birth is
about to take place, are careful to close every opening in the
house, even the keyhole; and they stop up every chink and
cranny in the walls. Also they tie up the mouths of all
animals inside and outside the house, for fear one of them
might swallow the child's soul. For a similar reason all
persons present in the house, even the mother herself, are
obliged to keep their mouths shut the whole time the birth
is taking place. When the question was put, Why they did
not hold their noses also, lest the child's soul should get into
one of them? the answer was that breath being exhaled
as well as inhaled through the nostrils, the soul would
be expelled before it could have time to settle down.<note place='foot'>W. F. A. Zimmermann, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Inseln des Indischen und Stillen
Meeres</hi> (Berlin, 1864-65), ii. 386
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Popular expressions in the language of civilised peoples,
such as to have one's heart in one's mouth, or the soul on
the lips or in the nose, shew how natural is the idea that the
life or soul may escape by the mouth or nostrils.<note place='foot'>Compare τοῦτον κατ᾽ ὤμου δεῖρον
ἄχρις ἡ ψυχὴ | αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ χειλέων μοῦνον
ἡ κακὴ λειφθῇ, Herodas, <hi rend='italic'>Mimiambi</hi>,
iii. 3 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; μόνον οὐκ ἐπὶ τοῖς χείλεσι
τὰς ψυχὰς ἕχοντας, Dio Chrysostom,
<hi rend='italic'>Orat.</hi> xxxii. vol. i. p. 417, ed.
Dindorf; modern Greek μὲ τὴ ψυχὴ ᾽ς
τὰ δόντια, G. F. Abbott, <hi rend='italic'>Macedonian
Folklore</hi>, p. 193 note; <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>mihi anima
in naso esse, stabam tanquam mortuus</foreign>,</q>
Petronius, <hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> 62; <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in primis labris
animam habere</foreign>,</q> Seneca, <hi rend='italic'>Natur.
quaest.</hi> iii. praef. 16; <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Voilà un
pauvre malade qui a le feu dans le
corps, et l'âme sur le bout des lèvres</foreign>,</q>
J. de Brebeuf, in <hi rend='italic'>Relations des
Jésuites</hi>, 1636, p. 113 (Canadian
reprint); <q>This posture keeps the
weary soul hanging upon the lip; ready
to leave the carcass, and yet not
suffered to take its wing,</q> R. Bentley,
<q>Sermon on Popery,</q> quoted in
Monk's <hi rend='italic'>Life of Bentley</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. 382. In
Czech they say of a dying person that
his soul is on his tongue (Br. Jelínek,
in <hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen der anthropolog.
Gesellschaft in Wien</hi>, xxi. (1891) p.
22).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The soul
conceived
as a bird
ready to
fly away.</note>
Often the soul is conceived as a bird ready to take
flight. This conception has probably left traces in most
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
languages,<note place='foot'>Compare the Greek ποτάομαι,
ἀναπτερόω, etc.</note> and it lingers as a metaphor in poetry. But
what is metaphor to a modern European poet was sober
earnest to his savage ancestor, and is still so to many
people. The Bororos of Brazil fancy that the human
soul has the shape of a bird, and passes in that shape
out of the body in dreams.<note place='foot'>K. von den Steinen, <hi rend='italic'>Unter den
Naturvölkern Zentral-Brasiliens</hi> (Berlin,
1894), pp. 511, 512.</note> According to the Bilqula
or Bella Coola Indians of British Columbia the soul
dwells in the nape of the neck and resembles a bird
enclosed in an egg. If the shell breaks and the soul flies
away, the man must die. If he swoons or becomes crazed,
it is because his soul has flown away without breaking its
shell. The shaman can hear the buzzing of its wings, like
the buzz of a mosquito, as the soul flits past; and he may
catch and replace it in the nape of its owner's neck.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, in <hi rend='italic'>Seventh Report on the
North-Western Tribes of Canada</hi>, pp. 14
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (separate reprint of the <hi rend='italic'>Report of
the British Association for 1891</hi>).</note> A
Melanesian wizard in Lepers' Island has been known to
send out his soul in the form of an eagle to pursue a ship
and learn the fortunes of some natives who were being
carried off in it.<note place='foot'>R. H. Codrington, <hi rend='italic'>The Melanesians</hi>,
pp. 207 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The soul of Aristeas of Proconnesus was
seen to issue from his mouth in the shape of a raven.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> vii. 174. Compare
Herodotus, iv. 14 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Maximus
Tyríus, <hi rend='italic'>Dissert.</hi> xvi. 2.</note>
There is a popular opinion in Bohemia that the parting soul
comes forth from the mouth like a white bird.<note place='foot'>Br. Jelínek, <q>Materialien zur
Vorgeschichte und Volkskunde Böhmens,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen der anthropologischen
Gesellschaft in Wien</hi>, xxi.
(1891) p. 22.</note> The Malays
carry out the conception of the bird-soul in a number of odd
ways. If the soul is a bird on the wing, it may be attracted
by rice, and so either prevented from taking wing or lured
back again from its perilous flight. Thus in Java when a
child is placed on the ground for the first time (a moment
which uncultured people seem to regard as especially
dangerous), it is put in a hen-coop and the mother makes a
clucking sound, as if she were calling hens.<note place='foot'>G. A. Wilken, <q>Het animisme
bij de volken van den Indischen
Archipel,</q> <hi rend='italic'>De Indische Gids</hi>, June
1884, p. 944.</note> Amongst the
Battas of Sumatra, when a man returns from a dangerous
enterprise, grains of rice are placed on his head, and these
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
grains are called <foreign rend='italic'>padiruma tondi</foreign>, that is, <q>means to make the
soul (<foreign rend='italic'>tondi</foreign>) stay at home.</q> In Java also rice is placed on the
head of persons who have escaped a great danger or have
returned home unexpectedly after it had been supposed that
they were lost.<note place='foot'>G. A. Wilken, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> Similarly in the district of Sintang in
West Borneo, if any one has had a great fright, or escaped a
serious peril, or comes back after a long and dangerous
journey, or has taken a solemn oath, the first thing that his
relations or friends do is to strew yellow rice on his head,
mumbling, <q>Cluck! cluck! soul!</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>koer, koer, semangat</foreign>).
And when a person, whether man, woman, or child, has
fallen out of a house or off a tree, and has been brought
home, his wife or other kinswoman goes as speedily as
possible to the spot where the accident happened, and there
strews rice, which has been coloured yellow, while she
utters the words, <q>Cluck! cluck! soul! So-and-so is in
his house again. Cluck! cluck! soul!</q> Then she gathers
up the rice in a basket, carries it to the sufferer, and drops
the grains from her hand on his head, saying again, <q>Cluck!
cluck! soul!</q><note place='foot'>E. L. M. Kühr, <q>Schetsen uit
Borneo's Westerafdeeling,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde
van Nederlandsch-Indie</hi>, xlvii. (1897)
p. 57.</note> Here the intention clearly is to decoy back
the loitering bird-soul and replace it in the head of its owner.
In southern Celebes they think that a bridegroom's soul is
apt to fly away at marriage, so coloured rice is scattered over
him to induce it to stay. And, in general, at festivals in
South Celebes rice is strewed on the head of the person in
whose honour the festival is held, with the object of detaining
his soul, which at such times is in especial danger of being
lured away by envious demons.<note place='foot'>B. F. Matthes, <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de
Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes</hi>, p. 33;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Over de Bissoes of heidensche
priesters en priesteressen der Boeginezen</hi>,
pp. 9 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Makassaarsch-Hollandsch
Woordenboek</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.vv.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Kôerróe</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>soemāñgá</hi>,
pp. 41, 569. Of these two
words, the former means the sound made
in calling fowls, and the latter means
the soul. The expression for the ceremonies
described in the text is
<foreign rend='italic'>ápakôerróe soemāñgá</foreign>. So common is
the recall of the bird-soul among the
Malays that the words <foreign rend='italic'>koer (kur)
semangat</foreign> (<q>cluck! cluck! soul!</q>)
often amount to little more than an
expression of astonishment, like our
<q>Good gracious me!</q> See W. W.
Skeat, <hi rend='italic'>Malay Magic</hi>, p. 47, note 2.</note> For example, after a
successful war the welcome to the victorious prince takes the
form of strewing him with roasted and coloured rice <q>to
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
prevent his life-spirit, as if it were a bird, from flying out of
his body in consequence of the envy of evil spirits.</q><note place='foot'>B. F. Matthes, <q>Over de <foreign rend='italic'>âdá's</foreign> of
gewoonten der Makassaren en Boegineezen,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Verslagen en Mededeelingen der
koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen</hi>
(Amsterdam), Afdeeling Letterkunde,
Reeks iii. Deel ii. (1885)
pp. 174 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. K. Niemann, <q>De
Boegineezen en Makassaren,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde
van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>, xxxviii.(1889)
p. 281.</note>
In Central Celebes, when a party of head-hunters returns
from a successful expedition, a woman scatters rice on their
heads for a similar purpose.<note place='foot'>A. C. Kruyt, <q>Het koppensnellen
der Toradja's,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verslagen en Mededeelingen
der koninklijke Akademie van
Wetenschappen</hi> (Amsterdam), Afdeeling
Letterkunde, Reeks iv. Deel iii.
(1899) p. 162.</note> Among the Minangkabauers of
Sumatra the old rude notions of the soul seem to be dying
out. Nowadays most of the people hold that the soul, being
immaterial, has no shape or form. But some of the sorcerers
assert that the soul goes and comes in the shape of a tiny
man. Others are of opinion that it does so in the form of a
fly; hence they make food ready to induce the absent
soul to come back, and the first fly that settles on the food
is regarded as the returning truant. But in native poetry
and popular expressions there are traces of the belief that
the soul quits the body in the form of a bird.<note place='foot'>J. L. van der Toorn, <q>Het
animisme bij den Minangkabauer der
Padangsche Bovenlanden,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van
Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>, xxxix. (1890)
pp. 56-58. On traces of the bird-soul
in Mohammedan popular belief, see
I. Goldziher, <q>Der Seelenvogel im
islamischen Volksglauben,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>,
lxxxiii. (1903) pp. 301-304; and on
the soul in bird-form generally, see
J. von Negelein, <q>Seele als Vogel,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxxix. (1901) pp. 357-361,
381-384.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The soul
is supposed
to be
absent in
sleep.</note>
The soul of a sleeper is supposed to wander away from
his body and actually to visit the places, to see the persons,
and to perform the acts of which he dreams. For example,
when an Indian of Brazil or Guiana wakes up from a sound
sleep, he is firmly convinced that his soul has really been away
hunting, fishing, felling trees, or whatever else he has dreamed
of doing, while all the time his body has been lying motionless
in his hammock. A whole Bororo village has been
thrown into a panic and nearly deserted because somebody
had dreamed that he saw enemies stealthily approaching it.
A Macusi Indian in weak health, who dreamed that his
employer had made him haul the canoe up a series of
difficult cataracts, bitterly reproached his master next
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
morning for his want of consideration in thus making a poor
invalid go out and toil during the night.<note place='foot'>K. von den Steinen, <hi rend='italic'>Unter den
Naturvölkern Zentral-Brasiliens</hi>, p.
340; E. F. im Thurn, <hi rend='italic'>Among the Indians
of Guiana</hi>, pp. 344 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The Indians of
the Gran Chaco are often heard to relate the most incredible
stories as things which they have themselves seen and heard;
hence strangers who do not know them intimately say in
their haste that these Indians are liars. In point of fact
the Indians are firmly convinced of the truth of what they
relate; for these wonderful adventures are simply their
dreams, which they do not distinguish from waking realities.<note place='foot'>V. Fric, <q>Eine Pilcomayo-Reise
in den Chaco Central,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxxxix.
(1906) p. 233.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The soul
absent
in sleep
may be
prevented
from
returning
to the
body.</note>
Now the absence of the soul in sleep has its dangers, for
if from any cause the soul should be permanently detained
away from the body, the person thus deprived of the vital
principle must die.<note place='foot'>Shway Yoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Burman, his
Life and Notions</hi> (London, 1882), ii.
100.</note> There is a German belief that the
soul escapes from a sleeper's mouth in the form of a white
mouse or a little bird, and that to prevent the return of
the bird or animal would be fatal to the sleeper.<note place='foot'>R. Andree, <hi rend='italic'>Braunschweiger Volkskunde</hi>
(Brunswick, 1896), p. 266.</note> Hence
in Transylvania they say that you should not let a child
sleep with its mouth open, or its soul will slip out in
the shape of a mouse, and the child will never wake.<note place='foot'>H. von Wlislocki, <hi rend='italic'>Volksglaube und
Volksbrauch der Siebenbürger Sachsen</hi>
(Berlin, 1893), p. 167.</note>
Many causes may detain the sleeper's soul. Thus, his soul
may meet the soul of another sleeper and the two souls
may fight; if a Guinea negro wakens with sore bones in the
morning, he thinks that his soul has been thrashed by
another soul in sleep.<note place='foot'>J. L. Wilson, <hi rend='italic'>Western Africa</hi>
(London, 1856), p. 220; A. B. Ellis,
<hi rend='italic'>The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave
Coast</hi>, p. 20.</note> Or it may meet the soul of a person
just deceased and be carried off by it; hence in the Aru
Islands the inmates of a house will not sleep the night after
a death has taken place in it, because the soul of the
deceased is supposed to be still in the house and they fear
to meet it in a dream.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik- en
kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en
Papua</hi>, p. 267. For detention of a
sleeper's soul by spirits and consequent
illness, see also Mason, quoted in
A. Bastian's <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen
Asien</hi>, ii. 387 note.</note> Similarly among the Upper Thompson
Indians of British Columbia, the friends and neighbours
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
who gathered in a house after a death and remained there
till the burial was over were not allowed to sleep, lest their
souls should be drawn away by the ghost of the deceased or
by his guardian spirit.<note place='foot'>J. Teit, <q>The Thompson Indians
of British Columbia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Memoir of the
American Museum of Natural History,
The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</hi>,
vol. i. part iv. (April 1900) p. 327.
The Koryak of North-Eastern Asia
also keep awake so long as there is a
corpse in the house. See W. Jochelson,
<q>The Koryak, Religion and Myths,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Memoir of the American Museum for
Natural History, The Jesup North
Pacific Expedition</hi>, vol. vi. part i.
(Leyden and New York, 1905) p. 110.</note> The Lengua Indians of the Gran
Chaco hold that the vagrant spirits of the dead may come
to life again if only they can take possession of a sleeper's
body during the absence of his soul in dreams. Hence,
when the shades of night have fallen, the ghosts of the
departed gather round the villages, watching for a chance to
pounce on the bodies of dreamers and to enter into them
through the gateway of the breast.<note place='foot'>G. Kurze, <q>Sitten und Gebräuche
der Lengua-Indianer,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mitteilungen
der Geographischen Gesellschaft zu
Jena</hi>, xxiii. (1905) p. 18.</note> Again, the soul of the
sleeper may be prevented by an accident or by physical
force from returning to his body. When a Dyak dreams
of falling into the water, he supposes that this accident
has really befallen his spirit, and he sends for a wizard,
who fishes for the spirit with a hand-net in a basin of
water till he catches it and restores it to its owner.<note place='foot'>H. Ling Roth, <q>Low's Natives
of Borneo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxi. (1892) p. 112.</note> The
Santals tell how a man fell asleep, and growing very
thirsty, his soul, in the form of a lizard, left his body and
entered a pitcher of water to drink. Just then the owner of
the pitcher happened to cover it; so the soul could not
return to the body and the man died. While his friends
were preparing to burn the body some one uncovered the
pitcher to get water. The lizard thus escaped and returned
to the body, which immediately revived; so the man rose
up and asked his friends why they were weeping. They
told him they thought he was dead and were about to burn
his body. He said he had been down a well to get water,
but had found it hard to get out and had just returned. So
they saw it all.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>, vii. (1878)
p. 273; A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Völkerstämme
am Brahmaputra</hi>, p. 127. A similar
story is told by the Hindoos and
Malays, though the lizard form of the
soul is not mentioned. See <hi rend='italic'>Panjab
Notes and Queries</hi>, iii. p. 166, § 679;
N. Annandale, <q>Primitive Beliefs and
Customs of the Patani Fishermen,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Fasciculi Malayenses, Anthropology</hi>,
part i. (April 1903) pp. 94 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> A similar story is reported from Transylvania
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
as follows. In the account of a witch's trial at Mühlbach in
the eighteenth century it is said that a woman had engaged
two men to work in her vineyard. After noon they all lay
down to rest as usual. An hour later the men got up and
tried to waken the woman, but could not. She lay motionless
with her mouth wide open. They came back at sunset
and still she lay like a corpse. Just at that moment a big
fly came buzzing past, which one of the men caught and
shut up in his leathern pouch. Then they tried again to
waken the woman, but could not. Afterwards they let out
the fly; it flew straight into the woman's mouth and she
awoke. On seeing this the men had no further doubt that
she was a witch.<note place='foot'>E. Gerard, <hi rend='italic'>The Land beyond the
Forest</hi>, ii. 27 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> A similar story is told
in Holland (J. W. Wolf, <hi rend='italic'>Nederlandsche
Sagen</hi>, No. 250, pp. 343 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>). The
story of King Gunthram belongs to the
same class; the king's soul comes out
of his mouth as a small reptile (Paulus
Diaconus, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Langobardorum</hi>, iii. 34).
In an East Indian story of the same
type the sleeper's soul issues from his
nose in the form of a cricket (G. A.
Wilken, in <hi rend='italic'>De Indische Gids</hi>, June 1884,
p. 940). In a Swabian story a girl's
soul creeps out of her mouth in the form
of a white mouse (A. Birlinger, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches
aus Schwaben</hi>, i. 303). In
a Saxon story the soul comes out of the
sleeper's mouth in the shape of a red
mouse. See E. Mogk, in R. Wuttke's
<hi rend='italic'>Sächsische Volkskunde</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Dresden, 1901),
p. 318.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Danger of
awaking
a sleeper
suddenly
before his
soul has
time to
return.</note>
It is a common rule with primitive people not to waken
a sleeper, because his soul is away and might not have time
to get back; so if the man wakened without his soul, he
would fall sick. If it is absolutely necessary to rouse a
sleeper, it must be done very gradually, to allow the soul
time to return.<note place='foot'>Shway Yoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Burman</hi>, ii. 103;
M. and B. Ferrars, <hi rend='italic'>Burma</hi> (London,
1900), p. 77; R. G. Woodthorpe, in
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxvi. (1897) p. 23; A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Völker des östlichen Asien</hi>, ii. 389; F.
Blumentritt, <q>Der Ahnencultus und
die religiösen Anschauungen der
Malaien des Philippinen-Archipels,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen der Wiener Geogr. Gesellschaft</hi>,
1882, p. 209; J. G. F. Riedel,
<hi rend='italic'>De sluik-en kroesharige rassen tusschen
Selebes en Papua</hi>, p. 440; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Die
Landschaft Dawan oder West-Timor,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Deutsche geographische Blätter</hi>, x. 280;
A. C. Kruijt, <q>Een en ander aangaande
het geestelijk en maatschapelijk
leven van den Poso-Alfoer,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xxxix. (1895) p. 4;
K. von den Steinen, <hi rend='italic'>Unter den Naturvölkern
Zentral-Brasiliens</hi>, pp. 340,
510; L. F. Gowing, <hi rend='italic'>Five Thousand
Miles in a Sledge</hi> (London, 1889),
p. 226; A. C. Hollis, <hi rend='italic'>The Masai</hi>
(Oxford, 1905), p. 308. The rule is
mentioned and a mystic reason assigned
for it in the <hi rend='italic'>Satapatha Brâhmana</hi> (part
v. p. 371, J. Eggeling's translation).</note> A Fijian in Matuku, suddenly wakened
from a nap by somebody treading on his foot, has been
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
heard bawling after his soul and imploring it to return.
He had just been dreaming that he was far away in Tonga,
and great was his alarm on suddenly wakening to find his
body in Matuku. Death stared him in the face unless his
soul could be induced to speed at once across the sea and
reanimate its deserted tenement. The man would probably
have died of fright if a missionary had not been at hand to
allay his terror.<note place='foot'>Rev. Lorimer Fison, in a letter
to the author dated August 26,
1898.</note> Some Brazilian Indians explain the headache
from which a man sometimes suffers after a broken
sleep by saying that his soul is tired with the exertions it
made to return quickly to the body.<note place='foot'>K. von den Steinen, <hi rend='italic'>Unter den
Naturvölkern Zentral-Brasiliens</hi>, p.
340.</note> A Highland story,
told to Hugh Miller on the picturesque shores of Loch Shin,
well illustrates the haste made by the soul to regain its body
when the sleeper has been prematurely roused by an indiscreet
friend. Two young men had been spending the early
part of a warm summer day in the open air, and sat down
on a mossy bank to rest. Hard by was an ancient ruin
separated from the bank on which they sat only by a
slender runnel, across which there lay, immediately over a
miniature cascade, a few withered stalks of grass. <q>Overcome
by the heat of the day, one of the young men fell
asleep; his companion watched drowsily beside him; when
all at once the watcher was aroused to attention by seeing a
little indistinct form, scarce larger than a humble-bee, issue
from the mouth of the sleeping man, and, leaping upon the
moss, move downwards to the runnel, which it crossed along
the withered grass stalks, and then disappeared among the
interstices of the ruin. Alarmed by what he saw, the
watcher hastily shook his companion by the shoulder, and
awoke him; though, with all his haste, the little cloud-like
creature, still more rapid in its movements, issued from the
interstice into which it had gone, and, flying across the
runnel, instead of creeping along the grass stalks and over
the sward, as before, it re-entered the mouth of the sleeper,
just as he was in the act of awakening. <q>What is the
matter with you?</q> said the watcher, greatly alarmed, <q>what
ails you?</q> <q>Nothing ails me,</q> replied the other; <q>but you
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
have robbed me of a most delightful dream. I dreamed I
was walking through a fine rich country, and came at length
to the shores of a noble river; and, just where the clear
water went thundering down a precipice, there was a bridge
all of silver, which I crossed; and then, entering a noble
palace on the opposite side, I saw great heaps of gold and
jewels; and I was just going to load myself with treasure,
when you rudely awoke me, and I lost all.</q></q><note place='foot'>Hugh Miller, <hi rend='italic'>My Schools and
Schoolmasters</hi> (Edinburgh, 1854), ch.
vi. pp. 106 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Danger of
moving a
sleeper or
altering his
appearance.</note>
Still more dangerous is it in the opinion of primitive
man to move a sleeper or alter his appearance, for if this
were done the soul on its return might not be able to find
or recognise its body, and so the person would die. The
Minangkabauers of Sumatra deem it highly improper to
blacken or dirty the face of a sleeper, lest the absent soul
should shrink from re-entering a body thus disfigured.<note place='foot'>J. L. van der Toorn, <q>Het animisme
bij den Minangkabauer der
Padangsche Bovenlanden,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde
van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>, xxxix. (1890)
p. 50.</note>
Patani Malays fancy that if a person's face be painted while
he sleeps, the soul which has gone out of him will not recognise
him, and he will sleep on till his face is washed.<note place='foot'>N. Annandale, in <hi rend='italic'>Fasciculi Malayenses,
Anthropology</hi>, part i. (April
1903) p. 94.</note> In
Bombay it is thought equivalent to murder to change the
aspect of a sleeper, as by painting his face in fantastic
colours or giving moustaches to a sleeping woman. For
when the soul returns it will not know its own body and
the person will die.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, iii.
p. 116, § 530.</note> The Coreans are of opinion that
in sleep <q>the soul goes out of the body, and that if
a piece of paper is put over the face of the sleeper he
will surely die, for his soul cannot find its way back
into him again.</q><note place='foot'>W. W. Rockhill, <q>Notes on some
of the Laws, Customs, and Superstitions
of Korea,</q> <hi rend='italic'>American Anthropologist</hi>,
iv. (1891) p. 183.</note> The Servians believe that the soul of
a sleeping witch often leaves her body in the form of a
butterfly. If during its absence her body be turned round,
so that her feet are placed where her head was before, the
butterfly soul will not find its way back into her body
through the mouth, and the witch will die.<note place='foot'>W. R. S. Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Songs of the
Russian People</hi>, pp. 117 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; F. S.
Krauss, <hi rend='italic'>Volksglaube und religiöser
Brauch der Südslaven</hi> (Münster i. W.,
1890), p. 112. The latter writer tells
us that the witch's spirit is also supposed
to assume the form of a fly, a hen,
a turkey, a crow, and especially a
toad.</note> The Esthonians
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
of the island of Oesel think that the gusts which sweep up
all kinds of trifles from the ground and whirl them along
are the souls of old women, who have gone out in this shape
to seek what they can find. Meantime the beldame's body
lies as still as a stone, and if you turn it round her soul will
never be able to enter it again, until you have replaced the
body in its original position. You can hear the soul
whining and whimpering till it has found the right aperture.<note place='foot'>Holzmayer, <q>Osiliana,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen
der gelehrten Estnischen Gesellschaft
zu Dorpat</hi>, vii. (1872) No. 2,
p. 53.</note>
Similarly in Livonia they think that when the soul of a
were-wolf is out on his hateful business, his body lies like
dead; and if meanwhile the body were accidentally moved,
the soul would never more find its way into it, but would
remain in the body of a wolf till death.<note place='foot'>P. Einhorn, <q>Wiederlegunge der
Abgötterey,</q> etc., reprinted in <hi rend='italic'>Scriptores
rerum Livonicarun</hi>, ii. 645 (Riga
and Leipsic, 1848).</note> In the picturesque
but little known Black Mountain of southern France, which
forms a sort of link between the Pyrenees and the Cevennes,
they tell how a woman, who had long been suspected of
being a witch, one day fell asleep at noon among the
reapers in the field. Resolved to put her to the test, the
reapers carried her, while she slept, to another part of the
field, leaving a large pitcher on the spot from which they
had moved her. When her soul returned, it entered the
pitcher and cunningly rolled it over and over till the vessel
lay beside her body, of which the soul thereupon took
possession.<note place='foot'>A. de Nore, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes, mythes et
traditions des provinces de France</hi>
(Paris and Lyons, 1846), p. 88.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The soul
may quit
the body
in waking
hours,
thereby
causing
sickness,
insanity
or death. Recalling
truant
souls in
Australia,
Burma,
China,
Sarawak,
Luzon and
Mongolia.</note>
But in order that a man's soul should quit his body, it
is not necessary that he should be asleep. It may quit him
in his waking hours, and then sickness, insanity, or death
will be the result. Thus a man of the Wurunjeri tribe in
Victoria lay at his last gasp because his spirit (<foreign rend='italic'>murup</foreign>) had
departed from him. A medicine-man went in pursuit and
caught the spirit by the middle just as it was about to
plunge into the sunset glow, which is the light cast by the
souls of the dead as they pass in and out of the underworld,
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
where the sun goes to rest. Having captured the
vagrant spirit, the doctor brought it back under his opossum
rug, laid himself down on the dying man, and put the
soul back into him, so that after a time he revived.<note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of
South-East Australia</hi>, p. 387.</note>
The Karens of Burma are perpetually anxious about their
souls, lest these should go roving from their bodies, leaving
the owners to die. When a man has reason to fear that
his soul is about to take this fatal step, a ceremony is
performed to retain or recall it, in which the whole family
must take part. A meal is prepared consisting of a cock
and hen, a special kind of rice, and a bunch of bananas.
Then the head of the family takes the bowl which is used to
skim rice, and knocking with it thrice on the top of the house-ladder
says: <q><foreign rend='italic'>Prrrroo!</foreign> Come back, soul, do not tarry
outside! If it rains, you will be wet. If the sun shines,
you will be hot. The gnats will sting you, the leeches will
bite you, the tigers will devour you, the thunder will crush
you. <foreign rend='italic'>Prrrroo!</foreign> Come back, soul! Here it will be well
with you. You shall want for nothing. Come and eat
under shelter from the wind and the storm.</q> After that the
family partakes of the meal, and the ceremony ends with
everybody tying their right wrist with a string which has
been charmed by a sorcerer.<note place='foot'>Bringaud, <q>Les Karens de la
Birmanie,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Missions Catholiques</hi>, xx.
(1888) pp. 297 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Similarly the Lolos, an
aboriginal tribe of western China, believe that the soul
leaves the body in chronic illness. In that case they read
a sort of elaborate litany, calling on the soul by name and
beseeching it to return from the hills, the vales, the rivers,
the forests, the fields, or from wherever it may be straying.
At the same time cups of water, wine, and rice are set at the
door for the refreshment of the weary wandering spirit. When
the ceremony is over, they tie a red cord round the arm of
the sick man to tether the soul, and this cord is worn by him
until it decays and drops off.<note place='foot'>A. Henry, <q>The Lolos and other
tribes of Western China,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxiii.
(1903) p. 102.</note> So among the Kenyahs of
Sarawak a medicine-man has been known to recall the stray
soul of a child, and to fasten it firmly in its body by
tying a string round the child's right wrist, and smearing
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
its little arm with the blood of a fowl.<note place='foot'>C. Hose and W. M'Dougall, <q>The
Relations between Men and Animals in
Sarawak,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxxi. (1901) pp.
183 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Ilocanes of Luzon
think that a man may lose his soul in the woods or gardens,
and that he who has thus lost his soul loses also his senses.
Hence before they quit the woods or the fields they call to
their soul, <q>Let us go! let us go!</q> lest it should loiter behind
or go astray. And when a man becomes crazed or mad, they
take him to the place where he is supposed to have lost his
soul and invite the truant spirit to return to his body.<note place='foot'>De los Reyes y Florentino, <q>Die
religiöse Anschauungen der Ilocanen
(Luzon),</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen der k. k.
Geograph. Gesellschaft in Wien</hi>, xxxi
(1888) pp. 569 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The
Mongols sometimes explain sickness by supposing that the
patient's soul is absent, and either does not care to return
to its body or cannot find the way back. To secure the
return of the soul it is therefore necessary on the one hand
to make its body as attractive as possible, and on the other
hand to shew the soul the way home. To make the body
attractive all the sick man's best clothes and most valued
possessions are placed beside him; he is washed, incensed,
and made as comfortable as may be; and all his friends
march thrice round the hut calling out the sick man's name
and coaxing his soul to return. To help the wanderer to find
its way back a coloured cord is stretched from the patient's
head to the door of the hut. The priest in his robes reads
a list of the horrors of hell and the dangers incurred by
souls which wilfully absent themselves from their bodies.
Then turning to the assembled friends and the patient he
asks, <q>Is it come?</q> All answer <q>Yes,</q> and bowing to the
returning soul throw seed over the sick man. The cord
which guided the soul back is then rolled up and placed
round the patient's neck, who must wear it for seven days
without taking it off. No one may frighten or hurt him,
lest his soul, not yet familiar with its body, should again
take flight.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Seele und ihre
Erscheinungswesen in der Ethnographie</hi>,
p. 36.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Recalling
truant
souls in
Africa and
America.</note>
Some of the Congo tribes believe that when a man is
ill, his soul has left his body and is wandering at large.
The aid of the sorcerer is then called in to capture the
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
vagrant spirit and restore it to the invalid. Generally the
physician declares that he has successfully chased the soul
into the branch of a tree. The whole town thereupon turns
out and accompanies the doctor to the tree, where the
strongest men are deputed to break off the branch in which
the soul of the sick man is supposed to be lodged. This
they do and carry the branch back to the town, insinuating
by their gestures that the burden is heavy and hard to bear.
When the branch has been brought to the sick man's hut, he
is placed in an upright position by its side, and the sorcerer
performs the enchantments by which the soul is believed
to be restored to its owner.<note place='foot'>H. Ward, <hi rend='italic'>Five Years with the
Congo Cannibals</hi> (London, 1890), pp.
53 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The soul or shade of a Déné or
Tinneh Indian in the old days generally remained invisible,
but appeared wandering about in one form or another whenever
disease or death was imminent. All the efforts of the
sufferer's friends were therefore concentrated on catching
the roving shade. The method adopted was simple.
They stuffed the patient's moccasins with down and hung
them up. If next morning the down was warm, they made
sure that the lost soul was in the boots, with which accordingly
they carefully and silently shod their suffering friend.
Nothing more could reasonably be demanded for a perfect
cure.<note place='foot'>A. G. Morice, <q>The Western
Dénés, their Manners and Customs,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the Canadian Institute,
Toronto</hi>, Third Series, vii. (1888-1889)
pp. 158 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Au pays de l'ours
noir, chez les sauvages de la Colombie
Britannique</hi> (Paris and Lyons, 1897),
p. 75.</note> An Ottawa medicine-man has been known to catch
a stray soul in a little box, which he brought back and
inserted in the patient's mouth.<note place='foot'>Clicteur, in <hi rend='italic'>Annales de l'Association
de la Propagation de la Foi</hi>, iv
(1830) p. 479.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Recalling
truant
souls in
Sumatra, Borneo, Celebes.</note>
Pining, sickness, great fright, and death are ascribed by the
Battas or Bataks of Sumatra to the absence of the soul (<foreign rend='italic'>tendi</foreign>)
from the body. At first they try to beckon the wanderer
back, and to lure him, like a fowl, by strewing rice. Then
the following form of words is commonly repeated: <q>Come
back, O soul, whether thou art lingering in the wood, or on
the hills, or in the dale. See, I call thee with a <foreign rend='italic'>toemba
bras</foreign>, with an egg of the fowl Rajah <foreign rend='italic'>moelija</foreign>, with the eleven
healing leaves. Detain it not, let it come straight here,
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
detain it not, neither in the wood, nor on the hill, nor in
the dale. That may not be. O come straight home!</q><note place='foot'>M. Joustra, <q>Het leven, de zeden
en gewoonten der Bataks,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap</hi>, xlvi. (1902) p.
408.</note>
Sometimes the means adopted by the Battas to procure
the return of a sick person's soul are more elaborate. A
procession sets out from the village to the tuck of drum to
find and bring home the strayed soul. First goes a person
bearing a basket which contains cakes of rice-meal, rice
dyed yellow, and a boiled fowl's egg. The sorcerer follows
carrying a chicken, and behind him walks a man with a
black, red, and white flag. A crowd of sympathisers brings
up the rear. On reaching the spot where the lost soul is
supposed to tarry, they set up a small bamboo altar, and
the sorcerer offers on it the chicken to the spirit of the place,
the drums beating all the time. Then, waving his shawl to
attract the soul of the sick man, he says: <q>Come hither,
thou soul of So-and-So, whether thou sittest among the
stones or in the mud. In the house is thy place. We
have besought the spirit to let thee go.</q> After that the
procession reforms and marches back to the village to the
roll of drums and the clash of cymbals. On reaching the
door of the house the sorcerer calls out to the inmates,
<q>Has it come?</q> and a voice from within answers, <q>It is
here, good sorcerer.</q> At evening the drums beat again.<note place='foot'>J. H. Meerwaldt, <q>Gebruiken
der Bataks in het maatschappelijk
leven,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege het
Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
li. (1907) pp. 98 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The writer
gives <foreign rend='italic'>tondi</foreign> as the form of the Batak
word for <q>soul.</q></note>
A number of plants, including rice, a species of fig, and
garlic, are supposed by the Battas to possess soul-compelling
virtue and are accordingly made use of by them in rites
for the recovery of lost souls. When a child is sick, the
mother commonly waves a cloth to beckon home its wandering
spirit, and when a cock crows or a hen cackles in the
yard, she knows that the prodigal has returned. If the
little sufferer persists in being ill in spite of these favourable
omens, the mother will hang a bag of rice at the head of
her bed when she goes to sleep, and next morning on
getting up she measures the rice. If the rice has increased
in volume during the night, as it may do in a moisture-laden
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
atmosphere, she is confident that the lost soul has
indeed come home to stay.<note place='foot'>Dr. R. Römer, <q>Bijdrage tot de
Geneeskunst der Karo-Batak's,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift
voor Indische Taal- Land- en
Volkenkunde</hi>, i. (1908) pp. 212 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Kayans of Borneo
fasten packets of rice, flesh, and fish to the window in
the roof through which the wandering soul of a sick
man is expected to return home. The doctor sits cross-legged
on a mat under the open window with a display
of pretty things spread out temptingly before him as baits
to entice the spirit back to its deserted tabernacle. From
the window hangs a string of precious corals or pearls to serve
the returning prodigal as a ladder and so facilitate his descent
into the house. The lower end of the string is attached to
a bundle composed of wooden hooks, a fowl's feather, little
packets of rice, and so forth. Chanting his spells, the doctor
strokes the soul down the string into the bundle, which he
then deposits in a basket and hides in a corner till the dusk
of the evening. When darkness has fallen, he blows the
captured soul back into the patient's head and strokes the
sufferer's arm downwards with the point of an old spear in
order to settle the soul firmly in his body.<note place='foot'>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>In Centraal
Borneo</hi> (Leyden, 1900), i. 148, 152
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 164 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Quer durch Borneo</hi>
(Leyden, 1904-1907), i. 112 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 125.</note> Once when a
popular traveller was leaving a Kayan village, the mothers,
fearing that their children's souls might follow him on his
journey, brought him the boards on which they carry
their infants and begged him to pray that the souls of
the little ones would return to the familiar boards and
not go away with him into the far country. To each
board was fastened a looped string for the purpose of
tethering the vagrant spirits, and through the loop
each baby was made to pass a chubby finger to make sure
that its tiny soul would not wander away.<note place='foot'>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>Quer durch
Borneo</hi>, ii. 481.</note> When a Dyak
is dangerously ill, the medicine-men may say that his soul
has escaped far away, perhaps to the river; then they will
wave a garment or cloth about to imitate the casting of a
net, signifying thereby that they are catching the soul like a
fish in a net. Or they may give out that the soul has
escaped into the jungle; and then they will rush out of the
house to circumvent and secure it there. Or again they
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
may allege that it has been carried away over seas to some
unknown land; and then they will play at paddling a boat
to follow it across the great water. But more commonly
their mode of treatment is as follows. A spear is set up in
the middle of the verandah with a few leaves tied to it and
the medicine-boxes of the medicine-men laid at its foot.
Round this the doctors run at full speed, chanting the while,
till one of them falls down and lies motionless. The
bystanders cover him with a blanket, and wait while his
spirit hies away after the errant soul and brings it back.
Presently he comes to himself, stares vacantly about like a
man awaking from sleep, and then rises, holding the soul in
his clenched right hand. He then returns it to the patient
through the crown of his head, while he mutters a spell.<note place='foot'>J. Perham, <q>Manangism in
Borneo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Straits Branch
of the Royal Asiatic Society</hi>, No. 19
(Singapore, 1887), p. 91, compare pp.
89, 90; H. Ling Roth, <hi rend='italic'>The Natives
of Sarawak and British North Borneo</hi>,
i. 274, compare pp. 272 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Among the Dyaks of the Kayan and Lower Melawie
districts you will often see, in houses where there are children,
a basket of a peculiar shape with shells and dried fruits
attached to it. These shells contain the remains of the
children's navel-strings, and the basket to which they are
fastened is commonly hung beside the place where the
children sleep. When a child is frightened, for example by
being bathed or by the bursting of a thunderstorm, its soul
flees from its body and nestles beside its old familiar friend
the navel-string in the basket, from which the mother easily
induces it to return by shaking the basket and pressing it to
the child's body.<note place='foot'>E. L. M. Kühr, <q>Schetsen uit
Borneo's Westerafdeeling,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van
Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>, xlvii. (1897) pp.
60 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Toboongkoos of Central Celebes
believe that sickness in general is caused by the departure of
the soul. To recover the wanderer a priest will set out food
in the courtyard of the sufferer's house and then invoke the
soul, promising it many fine things if it will only come back.
When he thinks it has complied with his request, he catches
it in a cloth which he keeps ready for the purpose. This
cloth he afterwards claps on the sick man's head, thereby
restoring to him his lost soul.<note place='foot'>A. C. Kruijt, <q>Eenige ethnografische
aanteekeningen omtrent de
Toboengkoe en de Tomori,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap</hi>, xliv. (1900) p.
225.</note>
</p>

<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Wandering
souls in
popular
tales.</note>
In an Indian story a king conveys his soul into the
dead body of a Brahman, and a hunchback conveys his soul
into the deserted body of the king. The hunchback is now
king and the king is a Brahman. However, the hunchback
is induced to shew his skill by transferring his soul to the
dead body of a parrot, and the king seizes the opportunity
to regain possession of his own body.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Pantschatantra</hi>, übersetzt von Th.
Benfey (Leipsic, 1859), ii. 124 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> A tale of the same
type, with variations of detail, reappears among the Malays.
A king has incautiously transferred his soul to an ape, upon
which the vizier adroitly inserts his own soul into the king's
body and so takes possession of the queen and the kingdom,
while the true king languishes at court in the outward
semblance of an ape. But one day the false king, who
played for high stakes, was watching a combat of rams,
and it happened that the animal on which he had laid his
money fell down dead. All efforts to restore animation
proved unavailing till the false king, with the instinct of a
true sportsman, transferred his own soul to the body of the
deceased ram, and thus renewed the fray. The real king in
the body of the ape saw his chance, and with great presence
of mind darted back into his own body, which the vizier
had rashly vacated. So he came to his own again, and the
usurper in the ram's body met with the fate he richly
deserved.<note place='foot'>J. Brandes, <q>Iets over het Pape-gaai-boek,
zooals het bij de Maleiers
voorkomt,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>, xli.
(1899) pp. 480-483. A story of this
sort is quoted from the <hi rend='italic'>Persian Tales</hi>
in the <hi rend='italic'>Spectator</hi> (No. 578, Aug. 9,
1714).</note> In another Indian story a Brahman reanimates
the dead body of a king by conveying his own soul into it.
Meantime the Brahman's body has been burnt, and his soul
is obliged to remain in the body of the king.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Katha Sarit Ságara</hi>, translated by
C. H. Tawney (Calcutta, 1880), i. 21
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> For other Indian tales of the same
general type, with variations in detail,
see <hi rend='italic'>Lettres édifiantes et curieuses</hi>,
Nouvelle Édition, xii. 183 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>North
Indian Notes and Queries</hi>, iv. p. 28,
§ 54.</note> In a Chinese
story we read of a monk in a Buddhist monastery who used
from time to time to send his soul away out of himself.
Whenever he was thus absent from the body, he took the
precaution of locking the door of his cell. On one of these
occasions an envoy from the north arrived and put up at
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
the monastery, but there was no cell for him to pass the
night in. Then he looked into the cell of the brother whose
soul was not at home, and seeing his body lying there
motionless, he battered the door in and said, <q>I will lodge
here. The man is dead. Take the body and burn it.</q>
His servants obeyed his orders, the monks being powerless
to interfere. That very night the soul came back, only to
find its body reduced to ashes. Every night it could be
heard crying, <q>Where shall I settle?</q> Those who knew
him then opened their windows, saying, <q>Here I am.</q> So
the soul came in and united itself with their body, and the
result was that they became much cleverer than before.<note place='foot'>J. J. M. de Groot, <hi rend='italic'>The Religious
System of China</hi>, iv. 104.</note>
Similarly the Greeks told how the soul of Hermotimus of
Clazomenae used to quit his body and roam far and wide,
bringing back intelligence of what he had seen on his rambles
to his friends at home; until one day, when his spirit was
abroad, his enemies contrived to seize his deserted body and
committed it to the flames.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> vii. 174; Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>De genio Socratis</hi>, 22; Lucian,
<hi rend='italic'>Muscae encomium</hi>, 7. Plutarch calls
the man Hermodorus. Epimenides,
the Cretan seer, had also the power of
sending his soul out of his body and
keeping it out as long as he pleased.
See Hesychius Milesius, in <hi rend='italic'>Fragmenta
historicorum Graecorum</hi>, ed. C. Müller,
v. 162; Suidas, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> Ἐπιμενίδης. On
such reported cases in antiquity see
further E. Rohde, <hi rend='italic'>Psyche</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> ii. 91 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> It is said that during the last
seven years of his life Sultan Bayazid ate nothing that had
life and blood in it. One day, being seized with a great
longing for sheep's trotters, he struggled long in this
glorious contest with his soul, until at last, a savoury dish
of trotters being set before him, he said unto his soul, <q>My
soul, the trotters are before thee; if thou wishest to enjoy
them, leave the body and feed on them.</q> Hardly had he
uttered these words when a living creature was seen to issue
from his mouth and drink of the juice in the dish, after
which it endeavoured to return whence it came. But the
austere sultan, determined to mortify his carnal appetite,
prevented it with his hand from entering his mouth, and
when it fell to the ground commanded that it should be
beaten. The pages kicked it to death, and after this
murder of his soul the sultan remained in gloomy seclusion,
taking no part or interest in the affairs of government.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Narrative of Travels in Europe,
Asia, and Africa in the Seventeenth
Century by Evliyā Efendī</hi>, translated
from the Turkish by the Ritter Joseph
von Hammer (Oriental Translation
Fund), vol. i. pt. ii. p. 3. I have not
seen this work. An extract from it,
containing the above narrative, was
kindly sent me by Colonel F. Tyrrel,
and the exact title and reference were
supplied to me by Mr. R. A. Nicholson,
who was so good as to consult the
book for me in the British Museum.</note>
</p>

<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
wandering
soul may
be detained
by ghosts.</note>
The departure of the soul is not always voluntary. It
may be extracted from the body against its will by ghosts,
demons, or sorcerers. Hence, when a funeral is passing the
house, the Karens of Burma tie their children with a special
kind of string to a particular part of the house, lest the
souls of the children should leave their bodies and go into
the corpse which is passing. The children are kept tied in
this way until the corpse is out of sight.<note place='foot'>E. B. Cross, <q>On the Karens,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the American Oriental
Society</hi>, iv. (1854) p. 311.</note> And after the
corpse has been laid in the grave, but before the earth has
been shovelled in, the mourners and friends range themselves
round the grave, each with a bamboo split lengthwise in one
hand and a little stick in the other; each man thrusts his
bamboo into the grave, and drawing the stick along the
groove of the bamboo points out to his soul that in this way
it may easily climb up out of the tomb. While the earth is
being shovelled in, the bamboos are kept out of the way, lest
the souls should be in them, and so should be inadvertently
buried with the earth as it is being thrown into the grave;
and when the people leave the spot they carry away the
bamboos, begging their souls to come with them.<note place='foot'>A. R. McMahon, <hi rend='italic'>The Karens of
the Golden Chersonese</hi> (London, 1876),
p. 318.</note> Further,
on returning from the grave each Karen provides himself
with three little hooks made of branches of trees, and calling
his spirit to follow him, at short intervals, as he returns, he
makes a motion as if hooking it, and then thrusts the hook
into the ground. This is done to prevent the soul of the
living from staying behind with the soul of the dead.<note place='foot'>F. Mason, <q>Physical Character of
the Karens,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Asiatic
Society of Bengal</hi>, 1866, pt. ii. pp.
28 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> On
the return of a Burmese or Shan family from a burial, old
men tie up the wrists of each member of the family with
string, to prevent his or her <q>butterfly</q> or soul from
escaping; and this string remains till it is worn out and
falls off.<note place='foot'>R. G. Woodthorpe, in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxvi.
(1897) p. 23.</note> When a mother dies leaving a young baby, the
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
Burmese think that the <q>butterfly</q> or soul of the baby
follows that of the mother, and that if it is not recovered
the child must die. So a wise woman is called in to get
back the baby's soul. She places a mirror near the corpse,
and on the mirror a piece of feathery cotton down.
Holding a cloth in her open hands at the foot of the mirror,
she with wild words entreats the mother not to take with
her the <q>butterfly</q> or soul of her child, but to send it back.
As the gossamer down slips from the face of the mirror she
catches it in the cloth and tenderly places it on the baby's
breast. The same ceremony is sometimes observed when
one of two children that have played together dies, and is
thought to be luring away the soul of its playmate to the
spirit-land. It is sometimes performed also for a bereaved
husband or wife.<note place='foot'>C. J. S. F. Forbes, <hi rend='italic'>British
Burma</hi> (London, 1878), pp. 99 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Shway Yoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Burman</hi> (London,
1882), ii. 102; A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker
des östlichen Asien</hi>, ii. 389.</note> The Bahnars of eastern Cochin-China
think that when a man is sick of a fever his soul has gone
away with the ghosts to the tombs. At sunset a sorcerer
attempts to lure the soul back by offering it sugar-cane,
bananas, and other fruits, while he sings an incantation
inviting the wanderer to return from among the dead to the
land of the living. He pretends to catch the truant soul
in a piece of cotton, which he then lays on the patient's
head.<note place='foot'>Guerlach, <q>Mœurs et superstitions
des sauvages Ba-hnars,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Missions
Catholiques</hi>, xix. (1887) pp.
525 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When the Karo-Bataks of Sumatra have buried
somebody and are filling in the grave, a sorceress runs
about beating the air with a stick. This she does in order
to drive away the souls of the survivors, for if one of these
souls happened to slip into the grave and to be covered up
with earth, its owner would die.<note place='foot'>J. H. Neumann, <q>De <foreign rend='italic'>begoe</foreign> in de
godsdienstige begrippen der Karo-Bataks
in de Doesoen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xlvi. (1902) p. 27.</note> Among some of the
Dyak tribes of south-eastern Borneo, as soon as the coffin
is carried to the place of burial, the house in which the
death occurred is sprinkled with water, and the father of
the family calls out the names of all his children and the
other members of his household. For they think that the
ghost loves to decoy away the souls of his kinsfolk, but that
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
his designs upon them can be defeated by calling out their
names, which has the effect of bringing back the souls to
their owners. The same ceremony is repeated on the
return from the burial.<note place='foot'>F. Grabowsky, in <hi rend='italic'>Internationales
Archiv für Ethnographie</hi>, ii. (1889)
p. 182.</note> It is a rule with the Kwakiutl
Indians of British Columbia that a corpse must not be
coffined in the house, or the souls of the other inmates
would enter the coffin, and they, too, would die. The body
is taken out either through the roof or through a hole made
in one of the walls, and is then coffined outside the house.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, in <hi rend='italic'>Eleventh Report on
the North-Western Tribes of Canada</hi>,
p. 6 (separate reprint from the <hi rend='italic'>Report
of the British Association for 1896</hi>).</note>
In the East Indian island of Keisar it is deemed imprudent
to go near a grave at night, lest the ghosts should catch
and keep the soul of the passer-by.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik- en
kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en
Papua</hi>, p. 414.</note> The Kei Islanders
believe that the spirits of their forefathers, angry at not
receiving food, make people sick by detaining their souls.
So they lay offerings of food on the grave and beg their
ancestors to allow the soul of the sick to return, or to
drive it home speedily if it should be lingering by the
way.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
221 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Attempts
to rescue
the lost
soul from
the spirits
of the dead
who are detaining
it.</note>
In Bolang Mongondo, a district in the west of Celebes,
all sickness is ascribed to the ancestral spirits who have
carried off the patient's soul. The object therefore is to
bring back the soul of the sufferer and restore it to him.
An eye-witness has thus described the attempted cure of a
sick boy. The priestesses, who acted as physicians, made
a doll of cloth and fastened it to the point of a spear, which
an old woman held upright. Round this doll the priestesses
danced, uttering charms, and chirruping as when one calls
a dog. Then the old woman lowered the point of the spear
a little, so that the priestesses could reach the doll. By this
time the soul of the sick boy was supposed to be in the doll,
having been brought into it by the incantations. So the
priestesses approached it cautiously on tiptoe and caught the
soul in the many-coloured cloths which they had been waving
in the air. Then they laid the soul on the boy's head, that
is, they wrapped his head in the cloth in which the soul was
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
supposed to be, and stood still for some moments with great
gravity, holding their hands on the patient's head. Suddenly
there was a jerk, the priestesses whispered and shook their
heads, and the cloth was taken off&mdash;the soul had escaped.
The priestesses gave chase to it, running round and round
the house, clucking and gesticulating as if they were driving
hens into a poultry-yard. At last they recaptured the soul
at the foot of the stair and restored it to its owner as before.<note place='foot'>N. Ph. Wilken en J. A. Schwarz,
<q>Het heidendom en de Islam in
Bolaang Mongondou,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xi. (1867) pp. 263 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Much in the same way an Australian medicine-man will
sometimes bring the lost soul of a sick man into a puppet
and restore it to the patient by pressing the puppet to his
breast.<note place='foot'>James Dawson, <hi rend='italic'>Australian Aborigines</hi>
(Melbourne, Sydney, and Adelaide,
1881), pp. 57 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Uea, one of the Loyalty Islands, the souls of
the dead seem to have been credited with the power of
stealing the souls of the living. For when a man was sick
the soul-doctor would go with a large troop of men and
women to the graveyard. Here the men played on flutes
and the women whistled softly to lure the soul home. After
this had gone on for some time they formed in procession and
moved homewards, the flutes playing and the women whistling
all the way, while they led back the wandering soul and drove
it gently along with open palms. On entering the patient's
dwelling they commanded the soul in a loud voice to enter
his body.<note place='foot'>W. W. Gill, <hi rend='italic'>Myths and Songs of
the South Pacific</hi> (London, 1876), pp.
171 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Madagascar when a man was sick or lunatic in
consequence of the loss of his soul, his friends despatched a
wizard in haste to fetch him a soul from the graveyard.
The emissary repaired by night to the spot, and having made
a hole in the wooden house which served as a tomb, begged
the spirit of the patient's father to bestow a soul on his son
or daughter, who had none. So saying he applied a bonnet
to the hole, then folded it up and rushed back to the house
of the sufferer, saying he had a soul for him. With that he
clapped the bonnet on the head of the invalid, who at once
said he felt much better and had recovered the soul which he
had lost.<note place='foot'>De Flacourt, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de la grande
Isle Madagascar</hi> (Paris, 1658), pp.
101 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rescuing
the soul
from the
dead in
Borneo and
Melanesia.</note>
When a Dyak or Malay of some of the western tribes
or districts of Borneo is taken ill, with vomiting and profuse
sweating as the only symptoms, he thinks that one of his
deceased kinsfolk or ancestors is at the bottom of it. To
discover which of them is the culprit, a wise man or woman
pulls a lock of hair on the crown of the sufferer's head, calling
out the names of all his dead relations. The name at which
the lock gives forth a sound is the name of the guilty party.
If the patient's hair is too short to be tugged with effect,
he knocks his forehead seven times against the forehead
of a kinsman who has long hair. The hair of the latter
is then tugged instead of that of the patient and answers
to the test quite as well. When the blame has thus
been satisfactorily laid at the door of the ghost who is
responsible for the sickness, the physician, who, as in other
countries, is often an old woman, remonstrates with him on
his ill behaviour. <q>Go back,</q> says she, <q>to your grave;
what do you come here for? The soul of the sick man
does not choose to be called by you, and will remain yet a
long time in its body.</q> Then she puts some ashes from the
hearth in a winnowing fan and moulds out of them a small
figure or image in human likeness. Seven times she moves
the basket with the little ashen figure up and down before
the patient, taking care not to obliterate the figure, while at
the same time she says, <q>Sickness, settle in the head, belly,
hands, etc.; then quickly pass into the corresponding part
of the image,</q> whereupon the patient spits on the ashen
image and pushes it from him with his left hand. Next the
beldame lights a candle and goes to the grave of the person
whose ghost is doing all the mischief. On the grave she
throws the figure of ashes, calling out, <q>Ghost, plague the
sick man no longer, and stay in your grave, that he may see
you no more.</q> On her return she asks the anxious relations
in the house, <q>Has his soul come back?</q> and they must
answer quickly, <q>Yes, the soul of the sick man has come
back.</q> Then she stands beside the patient, blows out the
candle which had lighted the returning soul on its way, and
strews yellow-coloured rice on the head of the convalescent,
saying, <q>Cluck, soul! cluck, soul! cluck, soul!</q> Last of
all she fastens on his right wrist a bracelet or ring which he
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
must wear for three days.<note place='foot'>E. L. M. Kühr, <q>Schetsen uit
Borneo's Westerafdeeling,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van
Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>, xlvii. (1897) pp.
61 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In this case we see that the
saving of the soul is combined with a vicarious sacrifice to
the ghost, who receives a puppet on which to work his will
instead of on the poor soul. In San Cristoval, one of the
Melanesian islands, the vicarious sacrifice takes the form of
a pig or a fish. A malignant ghost of the name of Tapia
is supposed to have seized on the sick man's soul and tied it
up to a banyan-tree. Accordingly a man who has influence
with Tapia takes a pig or fish to the holy place where the
ghost resides and offers it to him, saying, <q>This is for you to
eat in place of that man; eat this, don't kill him.</q> This
satisfies the ghost; the soul is loosed from the tree and
carried back to the sufferer, who naturally recovers.<note place='foot'>R. H. Codrington, <hi rend='italic'>The Melanesians</hi>,
pp. 138 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> A
regular part of the stock-in-trade of a Dyak medicine-man is
a crystal into which he gazes to detect the hiding-place of a
lost soul or to identify the demon who is causing the
sickness.<note place='foot'>Bishop Hose, <q>The Contents of a
Dyak Medicine Chest,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic
Society</hi>, No. 39, June 1903, p. 69.</note> In one of the New Hebrides a ghost will sometimes
impound the souls of trespassers within a magic fence
in his garden, and will only consent to pull up the fence and
let the souls out on receiving an unqualified apology and a
satisfactory assurance that no personal disrespect was
intended.<note place='foot'>R. H. Codrington, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 208.</note> In Motlav, another Melanesian island, it is
enough to call out the sick man's name in the sacred place
where he rashly intruded, and then, when the cry of the
kingfisher or some other bird is heard, to shout <q>Come
back</q> to the soul of the sick man and run back with it to
the house.<note place='foot'>R. H. Codrington, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
146 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Buryat
mode of
recovering
a lost soul
from the
nether
world.</note>
It is a comparatively easy matter to save a soul which
is merely tied up to a tree or detained as a vagrant in a
pound; but it is a far harder task to fetch it up from the
nether world, if it once gets down there. When a Buryat
shaman is called in to attend a patient, the first thing he
does is to ascertain where exactly the soul of the invalid
is; for it may have strayed, or been stolen, or be languishing
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
in the prison of the gloomy Erlik, lord of the world
below. If it is anywhere in the neighbourhood, the
shaman soon catches and replaces it in the patient's body.
If it is far away, he searches the wide world till he finds
it, ransacking the deep woods, the lonely steppes, and the
bottom of the sea, not to be thrown off the scent even
though the cunning soul runs to the sheep-walks in the hope
that its footprints will be lost among the tracks of the
sheep. But when the whole world has been searched in
vain for the errant soul, the shaman knows that there is
nothing for it but to go down to hell and seek the lost one
among the spirits in prison. At the stern call of duty he
does not flinch, though he knows that the journey is
toilsome, and that the travelling expenses, which are naturally
defrayed by the patient, are very heavy. Sometimes the
lord of the infernal regions will only agree to release the
soul on condition of receiving another in its stead, and that
one the soul of the sick man's dearest friend. If the patient
consents to the substitution, the shaman turns himself into
a hawk, pounces upon the soul of the friend as it soars from
his slumbering body in the form of a lark, and hands over
the fluttering, struggling thing to the grim warden of the
dead, who thereupon sets the soul of the sick man at liberty.
So the sick man recovers and his friend dies.<note place='foot'>V. M. Mikhailovskii, <q>Shamanism
in Siberia and European Russia,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxiv. (1895) pp. 69 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>American
Indian
modes of
recovering
a lost soul
from the
land of
the dead.</note>
When a shaman declares that the soul of a sick
Thompson Indian has been carried off by the dead, the
good physician, who is the shaman himself, puts on a
conical mask and sets off in pursuit. He now acts as
if on a journey, jumping rivers and such like obstacles,
searching, talking, and sometimes engaging in a tussle for
the possession of the soul. His first step is to repair to the
old trail by which the souls of heathen Thompsons went to the
spirit-land; for nowadays the souls of Christian Thompsons
travel by a new road. If he fails to find the tracks of the
lost soul there, he searches all the graveyards, one after
the other, and almost always discovers it in one of them.
Sometimes he succeeds in heading off the departing soul by
taking a short cut to the other world. A shaman can only
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
stay a short time there. So as soon as he lays hands on
the soul he is after, he bolts with it. The other souls
give chase, but he stamps with his foot, on which he wears
a rattle made of deer's hoofs. At the rattle of the hoofs
the ghosts retreat and he hurries on. A bolder shaman
will sometimes ask the ghosts for the soul, and if they refuse
to give it, he will wrest it from them. They attack him, but
he clubs them and brings away the soul by force. When
he comes back to the world, he takes off his mask and shews
his club all bloody. Then the people know he had a
desperate struggle. If he foresees that the harrowing of
hell is likely to prove a tough job, he increases the number
of wooden pins in his mask. The rescued soul is placed by
him on the patient's head and so returned to his body.<note place='foot'>J. Teit, <q>The Thompson Indians
of British Columbia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Memoir of the
American Museum of Natural History,
The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</hi>,
vol. i. part iv. (April 1900) pp.
363 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Among the Twana Indians of Washington State the descent
of the medicine-men into the nether world to rescue lost
souls is represented in pantomime before the eyes of the
spectators, who include women and children as well as men.
The surface of the ground is often broken to facilitate the
descent of the rescue party. When the adventurous band
is supposed to have reached the bottom, they journey along,
cross at least one stream, and travel till they come to the
abode of the spirits. These they surprise, and after a
desperate struggle, sustained with great ardour and a
prodigious noise, they succeed in rescuing the poor souls,
and so, wrapping them up in cloth, they make the best of
their way back to the upper world and restore the recovered
souls to their owners, who have been seen to cry heartily for
joy at receiving them back.<note place='foot'>Rev. Myron Eels, <q>The Twana,
Chemakum, and Klallam Indians of
Washington Territory,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Annual Report
of the Smithsonian Institution for
1887</hi>, pt. i. pp. 677 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Abduction
of souls by
demons in
Annam,
Cochin-China,
and China.</note>
Often the abduction of a man's soul is set down to
demons. The Annamites believe that when a man meets a
demon and speaks to him, the demon inhales the man's
breath and soul.<note place='foot'>A. Landes, <q>Contes et légendes
annamites,</q> No. 76 in <hi rend='italic'>Cochinchine
Française: excursions et reconnaissances</hi>,
No. 23 (Saigon, 1885), p.
80.</note> The souls of the Bahnars of eastern
Cochin-China are apt to be carried off by evil spirits, and
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
the modes of recovering them are various. If a man suffers
from a colic, the sorcerer may say that in planting sugar-cane,
maize or what-not, he has pierced the stomach of a
certain god who lives like a mole in the ground, and that
the injured deity has punished him by abstracting his soul
and burying it under a plant. Hence the cure for the colic
is to pull up the plant and water the hole with millet wine
and the blood of a fowl, a goat, or a pig. Again, if a child
falls ill in the forest or the fields, it is because some devil
has made off with its soul. To retrieve this spiritual loss
the sorcerer constructs an apparatus which comprises an egg-shell
in an egg-holder, a little waxen image of the sick
child, and a small bamboo full of millet wine. This
apparatus he sets up at a cross-road, praying the devil to
drink the wine and surrender the stolen soul by depositing
it in the egg-shell. Then he returns to the house, and
putting a little cotton to the child's head restores the soul
to its owner. Sometimes the sorcerer lays a trap for the
thievish demon, the bait consisting of the liver of a pig or a
fowl and the blood-smeared handle of a little mattock. At
nightfall he sets the trap at a cross-road and lies in wait
hard by. While the devil is licking the blood and munching
the liver, the artful sorcerer pounces out on him, and after a
severe struggle wrests the soul from his clutches, returning
to the village victorious, but breathless and bleeding
from his terrific encounter with the enemy of souls.<note place='foot'>Guerlach, <q>Chez les sauvages
Ba-hnars,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Missions Catholiques</hi>, xvi.
(1884) p. 436, xix. (1887) p. 453,
xxvi. (1894) pp. 142 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Fits and convulsions are generally set down by the
Chinese to the agency of certain mischievous spirits who
love to draw men's souls out of their bodies. At Amoy
the spirits who serve babies and children in this way
rejoice in the high-sounding titles of <q>celestial agencies
bestriding galloping horses</q> and <q>literary graduates residing
halfway up in the sky.</q> When an infant is writhing in
convulsions, the frightened mother hastens to the roof of the
house, and, waving about a bamboo pole to which one of
the child's garments is attached, cries out several times, <q>My
child So-and-so, come back, return home!</q> Meantime,
another inmate of the house bangs away at a gong in the
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
hope of attracting the attention of the strayed soul, which is
supposed to recognise the familiar garment and to slip into
it. The garment containing the soul is then placed on or
beside the child, and if the child does not die recovery is
sure to follow sooner or later.<note place='foot'>J. J. M. de Groot, <hi rend='italic'>The Religious
System of China</hi>, i. 243 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Similarly we saw that some
Indians catch a man's lost soul in his boots and restore it to
his body by putting his feet into them.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Abduction
of souls by
demons in
the East
Indies.</note>
If Galelareese mariners are sailing past certain rocks or
come to a river where they never were before, they must
wash their faces, for otherwise the spirits of the rocks or the
river would snatch away their souls.<note place='foot'>M. J. van Baarda, <q>Fabelen,
Verhalen en Overleveringen der Galelareezen,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en
Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>,
xlv. (1895) p. 509.</note> When a Dyak is
about to leave a forest through which he has been walking
alone, he never forgets to ask the demons to give him back
his soul, for it may be that some forest-devil has carried it
off. For the abduction of a soul may take place without its
owner being aware of his loss, and it may happen either
while he is awake or asleep.<note place='foot'>M. T. H. Perelaer, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographische
Beschrijving der Dajaks</hi>
(Zalt-Bommel, 1870), pp. 26 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Papuans of Geelvink
Bay in New Guinea are apt to think that the mists which
sometimes hang about the tops of tall trees in their tropical
forests envelop a spirit or god called Narbrooi, who draws
away the breath or soul of those whom he loves, thus
causing them to languish and die. Accordingly, when a
man lies sick, a friend or relation will go to one of these
mist-capped trees and endeavour to recover the lost soul.
At the foot of the tree he makes a peculiar sound to attract
the attention of the spirit, and lights a cigar. In its curling
smoke his fancy discerns the fair and youthful form of
Narbrooi himself, who, decked with flowers, appears and
informs the anxious enquirer whether the soul of his sick
friend is with him or not. If it is, the man asks, <q>Has he
done any wrong?</q> <q>Oh no!</q> the spirit answers, <q>I love
him, and therefore I have taken him to myself.</q> So the
man lays down an offering at the foot of the tree, and goes
home with the soul of the sufferer in a straw bag. Arrived
at the house, he empties the bag with its precious contents
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
over the sick man's head, rubs his arms and hands with
ginger-root, which he had first chewed small, and then ties a
bandage round one of the patient's wrists. If the bandage
bursts, it is a sign that Narbrooi has repented of his bargain,
and is drawing away the sufferer once more to himself.<note place='foot'><q>Eenige bijzonderheden betreffende
de Papoeas van de Geelvinksbaai van
Nieuw-Guinea,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en
Volkenkunde van Neêrlandsch-Indië</hi>,
ii. (1854) pp. 375 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> It is
especially the souls of children that
the spirit loves to take to himself.
See J. L. van Hasselt, <q>Die Papuastämme
an der Geelvinkbai,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mitteilungen
der Geographischen Gesellschaft
zu Jena</hi>, ix. (1891) p. 103; compare
<hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> iv. (1886) pp. 118 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The mists
seen to hang about tree-tops are due
to the power of trees to condense
vapour, as to which see Gilbert White,
<hi rend='italic'>Natural History of Selborne</hi>, part ii.
letter 29.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Abduction
of souls by
demons
in the
Moluccas.</note>
In the Moluccas when a man is unwell it is thought that
some devil has carried away his soul to the tree, mountain,
or hill where he (the devil) resides. A sorcerer having
pointed out the devil's abode, the friends of the patient carry
thither cooked rice, fruit, fish, raw eggs, a hen, a chicken, a
silken robe, gold, armlets, and so forth. Having set out the
food in order they pray, saying: <q>We come to offer to you,
O devil, this offering of food, clothes, gold, and so on; take
it and release the soul of the patient for whom we pray. Let
it return to his body, and he who now is sick shall be made
whole.</q> Then they eat a little and let the hen loose as a
ransom for the soul of the patient; also they put down the
raw eggs; but the silken robe, the gold, and the armlets
they take home with them. As soon as they are come to
the house they place a flat bowl containing the offerings
which have been brought back at the sick man's head, and
say to him: <q>Now is your soul released, and you shall fare
well and live to grey hairs on the earth.</q><note place='foot'>Fr. Valentyn, <hi rend='italic'>Oud- en nieuw Oost-Indiën</hi>,
iii. 13 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> A more modern
account from the same region describes how the friend of the
patient, after depositing his offerings on the spot where the
missing soul is supposed to be, calls out thrice the name of
the sick person, adding, <q>Come with me, come with me.</q>
Then he returns, making a motion with a cloth as if he had
caught the soul in it. He must not look to right or left or
speak a word to any one he meets, but must go straight to
the patient's house. At the door he stands, and calling out
the sick person's name, asks whether he is returned. Being
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
answered from within that he is returned, he enters and lays
the cloth in which he has caught the soul on the patient's
throat, saying, <q>Now you are returned to the house.</q> Sometimes
a substitute is provided; a doll, dressed up in gay
clothing and tinsel, is offered to the demon in exchange for
the patient's soul, with these words, <q>Give us back the ugly
one which you have taken away and receive this pretty one
instead.</q><note place='foot'>Van Schmidt, <q>Aanteekeningen
nopens de zeden, gewoonten en gebruiken,
benevens de vooroordeelen en bijgelovigheden
der bevolking van de
eilanden Saparoea, Haroekoe, Noessa
Laut, en van een gedeelte van de zuidkust
van Ceram,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor
Neêrlands Indië</hi>, 1843, dl. ii. 511 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Abduction
of souls by
demons in
Celebes
and
Siberia.</note>
Among the Alfoors or Toradjas of Poso, in Central
Celebes, a wooden puppet is offered to the demon as a substitute
for the soul which he has abstracted, and the patient must touch
the puppet in order to identify himself with it. The effigy is
then hung on a bamboo pole, which is planted at the place
of sacrifice outside of the house. Here too are deposited
offerings of rice, an egg, a little wood (which is afterwards
kindled), a sherd of a broken cooking-pot, and so forth. A
long rattan extends from the place of sacrifice to the sufferer,
who grasps one end of it firmly, for along it his lost soul will
return when the devil has kindly released it. All being
ready, the priestess informs the demon that he has come to
the wrong place, and that there are no doubt much better
quarters where he could reside. Then the father of the patient,
standing beside the offerings, takes up his parable as follows:
<q>O demon, we forgot to sacrifice to you. You have visited
us with this sickness; will you now go away from us to
some other place? We have made ready provisions for you
on the journey. See, here is a cooking-pot, here are rice, fire,
and a fowl. O demon, go away from us.</q> With that the
priestess strews rice towards the bamboo-pole to lure back
the wandering soul; and the fowl promised to the devil is
thrown in the same direction, but is instantly jerked back
again by a string which, in a spirit of intelligent economy,
has been previously attached to its leg. The demon is now
supposed to accept the puppet, which hangs from the pole,
and to release the soul, which, sliding down the pole and
along the rattan, returns to its proper owner. And lest the
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
evil spirit should repent of the barter which has just been
effected, all communication with him is broken off by cutting
down the pole.<note place='foot'>A. C. Kruijt, <q>Een en ander
aangaande het geestelijk en maatschappelijk
leven van den Poso-Alfoer,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege het
Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xxxix. (1895) pp. 5-8.</note> Similarly the Mongols make up a horse of
birch-bark and a doll, and invite the demon to take the doll
instead of the patient and to ride away on the horse.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Seele und ihre
Erscheinungswesen in der Ethnographie</hi>
(Berlin, 1868), pp. 36 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
J. G. Gmelin, <hi rend='italic'>Reise durch Sibirien</hi>, ii.
359 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> This mode of curing sickness,
by inducing the demon to swap the soul
of the patient for an effigy, is practised
also by the Dyaks and by some tribes
on the northern coast of New Guinea.
See H. Ling Roth, <q>Low's Natives of
Borneo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxi. (1892) p. 117; E. L. M.
Kühr, <q>Schetsen uit Borneo's Westerafdeeling,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en
Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>,
xlvii. (1897) pp. 62 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; F. S. A.
de Clercq, <q>De West- en Noordkust
van Nederlandsch Nieuw-Guinea,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift van het kon. Nederlandsch
Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</hi>, Tweede
Serie, x. (1893) pp. 633 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> A
Yakut shaman, rigged out in his professional costume, with
his drum in his hand, will boldly descend into the lower
world and haggle with the demon who has carried off a sick
man's soul. Not uncommonly the demon proves amenable
to reason, and in consideration of the narrow circumstances
of the patient's family will accept a more moderate ransom
than he at first demanded. For instance, he may be
brought to put up with the skin of an Arctic hare or Arctic
fox instead of a foal or a steer. The bargain being struck,
the shaman hurries back to the sufferer's bedside, from
which to the merely carnal eye he has never stirred, and
informs the anxious relatives of the success of his mission.
They in turn gladly hasten to provide the ransom.<note place='foot'>V. Priklonski, <q>Todtengebräuche
der Jakuten,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lix. (1891) pp.
81 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Über das
Schamenthum bei den Jakuten,</q> in
A. Bastian's <hi rend='italic'>Allerlei aus Volks- und
Menschenkunde</hi>, i. 218 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Souls
rescued
from
demons at
a house-warming
in
Minahassa.</note>
Demons are especially feared by persons who have just
entered a new house. Hence at a house-warming among the
Alfoors of Minahassa in Celebes the priest performs a ceremony
for the purpose of restoring their souls to the inmates. He
hangs up a bag at the place of sacrifice and then goes
through a list of the gods. There are so many of them that
this takes him the whole night through without stopping.
In the morning he offers the gods an egg and some rice.
By this time the souls of the household are supposed to be
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
gathered in the bag. So the priest takes the bag, and
holding it on the head of the master of the house, says,
<q>Here you have your soul; go (soul) to-morrow away
again.</q> He then does the same, saying the same words,
to the housewife and all the other members of the family.<note place='foot'>P. N. Wilken, <q>Bijdragen tot de
kennis van de zeden en gewoonten der
Alfoeren in de Minahassa,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
vii. (1863) pp. 146
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Why the priest, after restoring the
soul, tells it to go away again, is not
clear.</note>
Amongst the same Alfoors one way of recovering a sick
man's soul is to let down a bowl by a belt out of a window
and fish for the soul till it is caught in the bowl and hauled
up.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel <q>De Minahasa
in 1825,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>, xviii.
523.</note> And among the same people, when a priest is bringing
back a sick man's soul which he has caught in a cloth, he is
preceded by a girl holding the large leaf of a certain palm
over his head as an umbrella to keep him and the soul from
getting wet, in case it should rain; and he is followed by a
man brandishing a sword to deter other souls from any
attempt at rescuing the captured spirit.<note place='foot'>N. Graafland, <hi rend='italic'>De Minahassa</hi>
(Rotterdam, 1869), i. 327 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Souls
carried off
by the sun
and other
gods.</note>
In Nias, when a man dreams that a pig is fastened
under a neighbour's house, it is a sign that some one in that
house will die. They think that the sun-god is drawing
away the shadows or souls of that household from this world
of shadows to his own bright world of radiant light, and a
ceremony must needs be performed to win back these passing
souls to earth. Accordingly, while it is still night, the
priest begins to drum and pray, and he continues his orisons
till about nine o'clock next morning. Then he takes his
stand at an opening in the roof through which he can
behold the sun, and spreading out a cloth waits till the
beams of the morning sun fall full upon it. In the sunbeams
he thinks the wandering souls have come back again; so he
wraps the cloth up tightly, and quitting the opening in the
roof, hastens with his precious charge to the expectant household.
Before each member of it he stops, and dipping his
fingers into the cloth takes out his or her soul and restores
it to the owner by touching the person on the forehead.<note place='foot'>Fr. Kramer, <q>Der Götzendienst
der Niasser,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>, xxxiii.
(1890) pp. 490 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
The Thompson Indians of British Columbia think that the
setting sun draws the souls of men away towards it; hence
they will never sleep with their heads to the sunset.<note place='foot'>J. Teit, <q>The Thompson Indians
of British Columbia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Memoir of the
American Museum of Natural History,
The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</hi>,
vol. i. part iv. (April 1900) p. 357.</note> The
Samoans tell how two young wizards, passing a house
where a chief lay very sick, saw a company of gods from
the mountain sitting in the doorway. They were handing
from one to another the soul of the dying chief. It was
wrapt in a leaf, and had been passed from the gods inside
the house to those sitting in the doorway. One of the gods
handed the soul to one of the wizards, taking him for a god
in the dark, for it was night. Then all the gods rose up
and went away; but the wizard kept the chief's soul. In
the morning some women went with a present of fine mats
to fetch a famous physician. The wizards were sitting on
the shore as the women passed, and they said to the women,
<q>Give us the mats and we will heal him.</q> So they went to
the chief's house. He was very ill, his jaw hung down, and
his end seemed near. But the wizards undid the leaf and
let the soul into him again, and forthwith he brightened up
and lived.<note place='foot'>G. Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi>, pp. 142 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Lost souls
extracted
from a
fowl.</note>
The Battas or Bataks of Sumatra believe that the soul of
a living man may transmigrate into the body of an animal.
Hence, for example, the doctor is sometimes desired to
extract the patient's soul from the body of a fowl, in which
it has been hidden away by an evil spirit.<note place='foot'>J. B. Neumann, <q>Het Pane- en
Bila-stroomgebied op het eiland
Sumatra,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch
Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</hi>,
Tweede Serie, dl. iii., Afdeeling, meer
uitgebreide artikelen, No. 2 (1886),
p. 302.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Lost souls
brought
back in a
visible
form. Soul lost
by a fall
and
recovered
from the
earth.</note>
Sometimes the lost soul is brought back in a visible
shape. In Melanesia a woman, knowing that a neighbour
was at the point of death, heard a rustling in her house, as
of a moth fluttering, just at the moment when a noise of
weeping and lamentation told her that the soul was flown.
She caught the fluttering thing between her hands and ran
with it, crying out that she had caught the soul. But
though she opened her hands above the mouth of the corpse,
it did not revive.<note place='foot'>R. H. Codrington, <q>Religious
Beliefs and Practices in Melanesia,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
x. (1881) p. 281; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Melanesians</hi>,
p. 267.</note> In Lepers' Island, one of the New
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
Hebrides, for ten days after a birth the father is careful not
to exert himself or the baby would suffer for it. If during
this time he goes away to any distance, he will bring back
with him on his return a little stone representing the infant's
soul. Arrived at home he cries, <q>Come hither,</q> and puts
down the stone in the house. Then he waits till the child
sneezes, at which he cries, <q>Here it is</q>; for now he knows
that the little soul has not been lost after all.<note place='foot'>R. H. Codrington, <hi rend='italic'>The Melanesians</hi>,
p. 229</note> The Salish
or Flathead Indians of Oregon believe that a man's soul may
be separated for a time from his body without causing death
and without the man being aware of his loss. It is necessary,
however, that the lost soul should be soon found and restored
to its owner or he will die. The name of the man who has
lost his soul is revealed in a dream to the medicine-man,
who hastens to inform the sufferer of his loss. Generally a
number of men have sustained a like loss at the same time;
all their names are revealed to the medicine-man, and all
employ him to recover their souls. The whole night long
these soulless men go about the village from lodge to lodge,
dancing and singing. Towards daybreak they go into a
separate lodge, which is closed up so as to be totally dark.
A small hole is then made in the roof, through which the
medicine-man, with a bunch of feathers, brushes in the souls,
in the shape of bits of bone and the like, which he receives
on a piece of matting. A fire is next kindled, by the light
of which the medicine-man sorts out the souls. First he
puts aside the souls of dead people, of which there are usually
several; for if he were to give the soul of a dead person to
a living man, the man would die instantly. Next he picks
out the souls of all the persons present, and making them
all to sit down before him, he takes the soul of each, in the
shape of a splinter of bone, wood, or shell, and placing it on
the owner's head, pats it with many prayers and contortions
till it descends into the heart and so resumes its proper
place.<note place='foot'>Horatio Hale, <hi rend='italic'>United States Exploring
Expedition, Ethnography and
Philology</hi> (Philadelphia, 1846), pp.
208 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare Ch. Wilkes,
<hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the United States Exploring
Expedition</hi> (London, 1845),
iv. 448 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Similar methods of
recovering lost souls are practised
by the Haidas, Nootkas, Shuswap,
and other Indian tribes of British
Columbia. See Fr. Boas, in <hi rend='italic'>Fifth
Report on the North-Western Tribes of
Canada</hi>, pp. 58 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (separate reprint
from the <hi rend='italic'>Report of the British Association
for 1889</hi>); <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> in <hi rend='italic'>Sixth Report</hi>,
etc., pp. 30, 44, 59 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 94 (separate
reprint of the <hi rend='italic'>Report of the Brit. Assoc.
for 1890</hi>); <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> in <hi rend='italic'>Ninth Report</hi>, etc.,
p. 462 (in <hi rend='italic'>Report of the Brit. Assoc.
for 1894</hi>). Kwakiutl medicine-men
exhibit captured souls in the shape of
little balls of eagle down. See Fr.
Boas, in <hi rend='italic'>Report of the U.S. National
Museum for 1895</hi>, pp. 561, 575.</note> In Amboyna the sorcerer, to recover a soul detained
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
by demons, plucks a branch from a tree, and waving it to and
fro as if to catch something, calls out the sick man's name.
Returning he strikes the patient over the head and body
with the branch, into which the lost soul is supposed to
have passed, and from which it returns to the patient.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik- en
kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en
Papua</hi>, pp. 77 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In
the Babar Islands offerings for evil spirits are laid at the
root of a great tree (<foreign rend='italic'>wokiorai</foreign>), from which a leaf is plucked
and pressed on the patient's forehead and breast; the lost
soul, which is in the leaf, is thus restored to its owner.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 356 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In
some other islands of the same seas, when a man returns ill
and speechless from the forest, it is inferred that the evil
spirits which dwell in the great trees have caught and kept
his soul. Offerings of food are therefore left under a tree
and the soul is brought home in a piece of wax.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 376.</note> Amongst
the Dyaks of Sarawak the priest conjures the lost soul into
a cup, where it is seen by the uninitiated as a lock of hair,
but by the initiated as a miniature human being. This the
priest pokes back into the patient's body through an invisible
hole in his skull.<note place='foot'>Spenser St. John, <hi rend='italic'>Life in the
Forests of the Far East</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. 189; H.
Ling Roth, <hi rend='italic'>The Natives of Sarawak
and British North Borneo</hi>, i. 261.
Sometimes the souls resemble cotton
seeds (Spenser St. John, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>). Compare
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> i. 183.</note> In Nias the sick man's soul is restored
to him in the shape of a firefly, visible only to the sorcerer,
who catches it in a cloth and places it on the forehead of
the patient.<note place='foot'>Nieuwenhuisen en Rosenberg,
<q>Verslag omtrent het Eiland Nias,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Verhandel. van het Batav. Genootsch.
van Kunsten en Wetenschappen</hi>, xxx.
(Batavia, 1863) p. 116; H. von Rosenberg,
<hi rend='italic'>Der Malayische Archipel</hi>, p. 174;
E. Modigliani, <hi rend='italic'>Viaggio a Nías</hi> (Milan,
1890), p. 192.</note> Amongst the Indians of Santiago Tepehuacan,
if a child has fallen from the arms of its bearer and an
illness has resulted from the fall, the parents will take the
child's shirt, stretch it out on the spot where the little one
fell, and say, <q>Come, come, come back to the infant.</q>
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
Then they bring back a little of the earth wrapped up in
the shirt, and put the shirt on the child. They say that in
this manner the spirit is replaced in the child's body and
that he will recover.<note place='foot'><q>Lettre du curé de Santiago
Tepehuacan à son évêque sur les
mœurs et coutumes des Indiens soumis
à ses soins,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de la Société de
Géographie</hi> (Paris), IIme Série, ii.
(1834) p. 178.</note> With this we may compare an Irish
custom reported by Camden. When any one happens to
fall, he springs up again, and turning round thrice to the
right, digs the earth with a sword or knife, and takes up a
turf, because they say the earth restores his shade to him.
But if he falls sick within two or three days thereafter, a
woman skilled in these matters is sent to the spot, and
there says: <q>I call thee, So-and-so, from the East and
West, from the South and North, from the groves, woods,
rivers, marshes, fairies white, red, and black,</q> and so forth.
After uttering certain short prayers, she returns home to the
sick person, and whispering in his ear another prayer, along
with a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pater Noster</foreign>, puts some burning coals into a cup of
clean water, and so decides whether the distemper has been
inflicted by the fairies.<note place='foot'>W. Camden, <hi rend='italic'>Britannia</hi> (London,
1607), p. 792. The passage has not
always been understood by Camden's
translators.</note> Here, though Camden is not very
explicit, and he probably did not quite understand the
custom he describes, it seems plain that the shade or soul of
a man who has fallen is conceived as adhering to the
ground where he fell. Accordingly he seeks to regain
possession of it by digging up the earth; but if he fails to
recover it, he sends a wise woman to the spot to win
back his soul from the fairies who are detaining it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Recovery
of the soul
in ancient
Egypt.</note>
The ancient Egyptians held that a dead man is not in a
state to enter on the life hereafter until his soul has been
found and restored to his mummified body. The vital spark
had been commonly devoured by the malignant god Sit,
who concealed his true form in the likeness of a horned
beast, such as an ox or a gazelle. So the priests went in
quest of the missing spirit, slaughtered the animal which
had devoured it, and cutting open the carcase found the soul
still undigested in its stomach. Afterwards the son of the
deceased embraced the mummy or the image of his father
in order to restore his soul to him. Formerly it was
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
customary to place the skin of the slain beast on the dead
man for the purpose of recruiting his strength with that of
the animal.<note place='foot'>A. Moret, <hi rend='italic'>Le Rituel du culte divin
journalier en Égypte</hi> (Paris, 1902),
pp. 32-35, 83 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Souls
stolen or
detained by
sorcerers in
Fiji and
Polynesia.</note>
Again, souls may be extracted from their bodies or
detained on their wanderings not only by ghosts and demons
but also by men, especially by sorcerers. In Fiji, if a criminal
refused to confess, the chief sent for a scarf with which <q>to
catch away the soul of the rogue.</q> At the sight or even at
the mention of the scarf the culprit generally made a clean
breast. For if he did not, the scarf would be waved over
his head till his soul was caught in it, when it would be
carefully folded up and nailed to the end of a chief's canoe;
and for want of his soul the criminal would pine and die.<note place='foot'>Th. Williams, <hi rend='italic'>Fiji and the Fijians</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(London, 1860), i. 250.</note>
The sorcerers of Danger Island used to set snares for souls.
The snares were made of stout cinet, about fifteen to thirty
feet long, with loops on either side of different sizes, to suit
the different sizes of souls; for fat souls there were large
loops, for thin souls there were small ones. When a man
was sick against whom the sorcerers had a grudge, they set
up these soul-snares near his house and watched for the
flight of his soul. If in the shape of a bird or an insect it
was caught in the snare the man would infallibly die.<note place='foot'>W. W. Gill, <hi rend='italic'>Myths and Songs of
the South Pacific</hi>, p. 171; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Life in
the Southern Isles</hi>, pp. 181 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Cinet,
sinnet, or sennit is cordage made from
the dried fibre of the coco-nut husk.
Large quantities of it are used in Fiji.
See Th. Williams, <hi rend='italic'>Fiji and the Fijians</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
i. 69.</note> When
a Polynesian mother desired that the child in her womb
should grow up to be a great warrior or a great thief, she
repaired to the temple of the war-god Oro or of the thief-god
Hiro. There the priest obligingly caught the spirit of
the god in a snare made of coco-nut fibre, and then infused
it into the woman. When the child was born, the mother
took it to the temple and dedicated it to the god with
whose divine spirit the infant was already possessed.<note place='foot'>J. Williams, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of Missionary
Enterprises in the South Sea Islands</hi>
(London, 1838), pp. 93, 466 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> A
traveller in Zombo-land found traps
commonly set at the entrances of
villages and huts for the purpose of
catching the devil. See Rev. Th.
Lewis, <q>The Ancient Kingdom of
Kongo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Geographical Journal</hi>,
xix. (1902) p. 554.</note> The
Algonquin Indians also used nets to catch souls, but only as
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
a measure of defence. They feared lest passing souls, which
had just quitted the bodies of dying people, should enter
their huts and carry off the souls of the inmates to deadland.
So they spread nets about their houses to catch and entangle
these ghostly intruders in the meshes.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Relations des Jésuites</hi>, 1639, p. 44
(Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Detention
of souls by
sorcerers in
Africa.</note>
Among the Sereres of Senegambia, when a man wishes
to revenge himself on his enemy he goes to the <foreign rend='italic'>Fitaure</foreign>
(chief and priest in one), and prevails on him by presents to
conjure the soul of his enemy into a large jar of red
earthenware, which is then deposited under a consecrated
tree. The man whose soul is shut up in the jar soon dies.<note place='foot'>L. J. B. Bérenger-Féraud, <hi rend='italic'>Les
Peuplades de la Sénégambie</hi> (Paris,
1879), p. 277.</note>
Among the Baoules of the Ivory Coast it happened once
that a chief's soul was extracted by the magic of an enemy,
who succeeded in shutting it up in a box. To recover it,
two men held a garment of the sick man, while a witch
performed certain enchantments. After a time she declared
that the soul was now in the garment, which was
accordingly rolled up and hastily wrapped about the invalid
for the purpose of restoring his spirit to him.<note place='foot'>Delafosse, in <hi rend='italic'>L'Anthropologie</hi>, xi.
(1895) p. 558.</note> Some of the
Congo negroes think that enchanters can get possession
of human souls, and enclosing them in tusks of ivory,
sell them to the white man, who makes them work for
him in his country under the sea. It is believed that
very many of the coast labourers are men thus obtained;
so when these people go to trade they often look anxiously
about for their dead relations. The man whose soul is
thus sold into slavery will die <q>in due course, if not at the
time.</q><note place='foot'>W. H. Bentley, <hi rend='italic'>Life on the Congo</hi>
(London, 1887), p. 71.</note> In some parts of West Africa, indeed, wizards are
continually setting traps to catch souls that wander from their
bodies in sleep; and when they have caught one, they tie it
up over the fire, and as it shrivels in the heat the owner
sickens. This is done, not out of any grudge towards the
sufferer, but purely as a matter of business. The wizard
does not care whose soul he has captured, and will readily
restore it to its owner if only he is paid for doing so. Some
sorcerers keep regular asylums for strayed souls, and anybody
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
who has lost or mislaid his own soul can always have
another one from the asylum on payment of the usual fee.
No blame whatever attaches to men who keep these private
asylums or set traps for passing souls; it is their profession,
and in the exercise of it they are actuated by no harsh or
unkindly feelings. But there are also wretches who from pure
spite or for the sake of lucre set and bait traps with the
deliberate purpose of catching the soul of a particular man;
and in the bottom of the pot, hidden by the bait, are knives
and sharp hooks which tear and rend the poor soul, either
killing it outright or mauling it so as to impair the health of
its owner when it succeeds in escaping and returning to him.
Miss Kingsley knew a Kruman who became very anxious
about his soul, because for several nights he had smelt in
his dreams the savoury smell of smoked crawfish seasoned
with red pepper. Clearly some ill-wisher had set a trap
baited with this dainty for his dream-soul, intending to do
him grievous bodily, or rather spiritual, harm; and for the
next few nights great pains were taken to keep his soul
from straying abroad in his sleep. In the sweltering heat of
the tropical night he lay sweating and snorting under a
blanket, his nose and mouth tied up with a handkerchief to
prevent the escape of his precious soul.<note place='foot'>Mary H. Kingsley, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in West Africa</hi> (London, 1897), pp. 461 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Taking the
souls of
enemies
first and
their heads
afterwards.</note>
When Dyaks of the Upper Melawie are about to go out
head-hunting they take the precaution of securing the souls
of their enemies before they attempt to kill their bodies,
calculating apparently that mere bodily death will soon
follow the spiritual death, or capture, of the soul. With this
intention they clear a small space in the underwood of the
forest, and set up in the clearing one of those miniature
houses in which it is customary to deposit the ashes of the
dead. Food is placed in the little house, which, though
raised on four posts, is connected with the ground by a tiny
inverted ladder of the sort up which spirits are believed to
swarm. When these preparations have been completed, the
leader of the expedition comes and sits down a little way
from the miniature house, and addressing the spirits of
kinsmen who had the misfortune to be beheaded by their
enemies, he says, <q>O ghosts of So-and-so, come speedily back
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
to our village. We have rice in abundance. Our trees all
bear ripe fruit. Our baskets are full to the brim. O ghosts,
come swiftly back and forget not to bring your new friends
and acquaintances with you.</q> But by the new friends
and acquaintances of the ghosts he means the souls of the
enemies against whom he is about to lead the expedition.
Meantime the other warriors have hidden themselves close
by behind trees and bushes, and are listening with all their
ears. When the cry of an animal is heard in the forest, or
a humming sound seems to issue from the little house, it is
a sign that the ghosts of their friends have come, bringing
with them the souls of their enemies, which are accordingly
at their mercy. At that the lurking warriors leap forth from
their ambush, and with brandished blades hew and slash at
the souls of their foemen swarming unseen in the air. Taken
completely by surprise, the panic-stricken souls flee in all
directions, and are fain to hide under every leaf and stone on
the ground. But even here their retreat is cut off. For
now the leader of the expedition is hard at work, grubbing
up with his hands every stone and leaf to right and left, and
thrusting them with feverish haste into the basket, which he
at once ties up securely. He now flatters himself that he
has the souls of the enemy safe in his possession; and when
in the course of the expedition the heads of the foe are
severed from their bodies, he will pack them into the same
basket in which their souls are already languishing in
captivity.<note place='foot'>E. L. M. Kühr, in <hi rend='italic'>Internationales
Archiv für Ethnographie</hi>, ii. (1889)
p. 163; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Schetsen uit Borneo's
Westerafdeeling,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de Taal-
Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>,
xlvii. (1897) pp. 59 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Among
the Haida Indians of Queen Charlotte
Islands <q>every war-party must be
accompanied by a shaman, whose duty
it was to find a propitious time for
making an attack, etc., but especially
to war with and kill the souls of the
enemy. Then the death of their
natural bodies was certain.</q> See J.
R. Swanton, <q>Contributions to the
Ethnology of the Haida</q> (Leyden and
New York, 1905), p. 40 (<hi rend='italic'>Memoir of
the American Museum of Natural
History, The Jesup North Pacific
Expedition</hi>, vol. v. part i.). Some
of the Dyaks of south-eastern Borneo
perform a ceremony for the purpose of
extracting the souls from the bodies of
prisoners whom they are about to
torture to death. See F. Grabowsky,
<q>Der Tod, das Begräbnis, etc., bei
den Dajaken,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Internationales Archiv
für Ethnographie</hi>, ii. (1889) p. 199.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Injuries
of various
sorts done
to captured
souls by
wizards.</note>
In Hawaii there were sorcerers who caught souls of living
people, shut them up in calabashes, and gave them to people
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
to eat. By squeezing a captured soul in their hands they
discovered the place where people had been secretly buried.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Allerlei aus Volks- und
Menschenkunde</hi> (Berlin, 1888), i.
119.</note>
Amongst the Canadian Indians, when a wizard wished to kill
a man, he sent out his familiar spirits, who brought him the
victim's soul in the shape of a stone or the like. The wizard
struck the soul with a sword or an axe till it bled profusely,
and as it bled the man to whom it belonged fell ill and
died.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Relations des Jésuites</hi>, 1637, p.
50 (Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858).</note> In Amboyna if a doctor is convinced that a patient's
soul has been carried away by a demon beyond recovery, he
seeks to supply its place with a soul abstracted from another
man. For this purpose he goes by night to a house and
asks, <q>Who's there?</q> If an inmate is incautious enough
to answer, the doctor takes up from before the door a
clod of earth, into which the soul of the person who
replied is thought to have passed. This clod the doctor
lays under the sick man's pillow, and performs certain
ceremonies by which the stolen soul is conveyed into the
patient's body. Then as he goes home the doctor fires
two shots to frighten the soul from returning to its proper
owner.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik- en
kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en
Papua</hi> (the Hague, 1886), pp. 78
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> A Karen wizard will catch the wandering soul of
a sleeper and transfer it to the body of a dead man. The
latter, therefore, comes to life as the former dies. But the
friends of the sleeper in turn engage a wizard to steal the
soul of another sleeper, who dies as the first sleeper comes to
life. In this way an indefinite succession of deaths and
resurrections is supposed to take place.<note place='foot'>E. B. Cross, <q>On the Karens,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the American Oriental
Society</hi>, iv. (1854) p. 307.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Abduction
of human
souls by
Malay
wizards.</note>
Nowhere perhaps is the art of abducting human souls
more carefully cultivated or carried to higher perfection than
in the Malay Peninsula. Here the methods by which the
wizard works his will are various, and so too are his motives.
Sometimes he desires to destroy an enemy, sometimes to win
the love of a cold or bashful beauty. Some of the charms
operate entirely without contact; in others, the receptacle
into which the soul is to be lured has formed part of, or at
least touched, the person of the victim. Thus, to take an
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
instance of the latter sort of charm, the following are the
directions given for securing the soul of one whom you wish
to render distraught. Take soil from the middle of his
footprint; wrap it up in pieces of red, black, and yellow
cloth, taking care to keep the yellow outside; and hang it
from the centre of your mosquito curtain with parti-coloured
thread. It will then become your victim's soul. To
complete the transubstantiation, however, it is needful to
switch the packet with a birch composed of seven leaf-ribs
from a <q>green</q> coco-nut. Do this seven times at sunset, at
midnight, and at sunrise, saying, <q>It is not earth that I switch,
but the heart of So-and-so.</q> Then bury it in the middle
of a path where your victim is sure to step over it, and he
will unquestionably become distraught.<note place='foot'>W. W. Skeat, <hi rend='italic'>Malay Magic</hi> (London, 1900), pp. 568 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Another way is to
scrape the wood of the floor where your intended victim has
been sitting, mix the scrapings with earth from his or her
footprint, and knead the whole with wax from a deserted
bees' comb into a likeness of him or her. Then fumigate the
figure with incense and beckon to the soul every night for
three nights successively by waving a cloth, while you recite
the appropriate spell.<note place='foot'>W. W. Skeat, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 569 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the following cases the charm
takes effect without any contact whatever, whether direct or
indirect, with the victim. When the moon, just risen, looks
red above the eastern horizon, go out, and standing in the
moonlight, with the big toe of your right foot on the big toe
of your left, make a speaking-trumpet of your right hand and
recite through it the following words:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>OM. I loose my shaft, I loose it and the moon clouds over,</hi></q></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>I loose it, and the sun is extinguished.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>I loose it, and the stars burn dim.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>But it is not the sun, moon, and stars that I shoot at,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>It is the stalk of the heart of that child of the congregation, So-and-so.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Cluck! cluck! soul of So-and-so, come and walk with me,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Come and sit with me,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Come and sleep and share my pillow.</hi></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>Cluck! cluck! soul.</hi></q></l>
</lg>

</quote>

<p>
Repeat this thrice and after every repetition blow through
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
your hollow fist.<note place='foot'>W. W. Skeat, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 574 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Or you may catch the soul in your turban,
thus. Go out on the night of the full moon and the two
succeeding nights; sit down on an ant-hill facing the moon,
burn incense, and recite the following incantation:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>I bring you a betel leaf to chew,</hi></q></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Dab the lime on to it, Prince Ferocious,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>For Somebody, Prince Distraction's daughter, to chew.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Somebody at sunrise be distraught for love of me,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Somebody at sunset be distraught for love of me.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>As you remember your parents, remember me;</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>As you remember your house and house-ladder, remember me.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>When thunder rumbles, remember me;</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>When wind whistles, remember me;</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>When the heavens rain, remember me;</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>When cocks crow, remember me;</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>When the dial-bird tells its tales, remember me;</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>When you look up at the sun, remember me;</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>When you look up at the moon, remember me,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>For in that self-same moon I am there.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Cluck! cluck! soul of Somebody come hither to me.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>I do not mean to let you have my soul,</hi></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>Let your soul come hither to mine.</hi></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Now wave the end of your turban towards the moon
seven times each night. Go home and put it under your
pillow, and if you want to wear it in the daytime, burn
incense and say, <q>It is not a turban that I carry in my girdle,
but the soul of Somebody.</q><note place='foot'>W. W. Skeat, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 576 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Athenian
curse accompanied
by the
shaking of
red cloths.</note>
Perhaps the magical ceremonies just described may help
to explain a curious rite, of immemorial antiquity, which
was performed on a very solemn occasion at Athens. On
the eve of the sailing of the fleet for Syracuse, when all
hearts beat high with hope, and visions of empire dazzled
all eyes, consternation suddenly fell on the people one May
morning when they rose and found that most of the images
of Hermes in the city had been mysteriously mutilated in
the night. The impious perpetrators of the sacrilege were
unknown, but whoever they were, the priests and priestesses
solemnly cursed them according to the ancient ritual, standing
with their faces to the west and shaking red cloths up
and down.<note place='foot'>Lysias, <hi rend='italic'>Or.</hi> vi. 51, p. 51 ed. C.
Scheibe. The passage was pointed
out to me by my friend Mr. W. Wyse.
As to the mutilation of the Hermae,
see Thucydides, vi. 27-29, 60 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Andocides, <hi rend='italic'>Or.</hi> i. 37 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Alcibiades</hi>, 18.</note> Perhaps in these cloths they were catching the
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
souls of those at whom their curses were levelled, just as we
have seen that Fijian chiefs used to catch the souls of
criminals in scarves and nail them to canoes.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Extracting
a patient's
soul from
the stomach
of his
doctor.</note>
The Indians of the Nass River, in British Columbia, are
impressed with a belief that a physician may swallow his
patient's soul by mistake. A doctor who is believed to have
done so is made by the other members of the faculty to stand
over the patient, while one of them thrusts his fingers down
the doctor's throat, another kneads him in the stomach with
his knuckles, and a third slaps him on the back. If the
soul is not in him after all, and if the same process has been
repeated upon all the medical men without success, it is concluded
that the soul must be in the head-doctor's box. A
party of doctors, therefore, waits upon him at his house and
requests him to produce his box. When he has done so and
arranged its contents on a new mat, they take the votary of
Aesculapius and hold him up by the heels with his head in a
hole in the floor. In this position they wash his head, and
<q>any water remaining from the ablution is taken and poured
upon the sick man's head.</q><note place='foot'>J. B. McCullagh, in <hi rend='italic'>The Church
Missionary Gleaner</hi>, xiv. No. 164
(August 1887), p. 91. The same
account is copied from the <q>North
Star</q> (Sitka, Alaska, December 1888)
in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of American Folk-lore</hi>, ii.
(1889) pp. 74 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Mr. McCullagh's account
(which is closely followed in the
text) of the latter part of the custom is
not quite clear. It would seem that failing
to find the soul in the head-doctor's
box it occurs to them that he may have
swallowed it, as the other doctors were
at first supposed to have done. With
a view of testing this hypothesis they
hold him up by the heels to empty out
the soul; and as the water with which
his head is washed may possibly contain
the missing soul, it is poured on the
patient's head to restore the soul to
him. We have already seen that the
recovered soul is often conveyed into
the sick person's head.</note> Among the Kwakiutl Indians
of British Columbia it is forbidden to pass behind the back
of a shaman while he is eating, lest the shaman should inadvertently
swallow the soul of the passer-by. When that
happens, both the shaman and the person whose soul he
has swallowed fall down in a swoon. Blood flows from the
shaman's mouth, because the soul is too large for him and
is tearing his inside. Then the clan of the person whose
soul is doing this mischief must assemble and sing the
song of the shaman. In time the suffering sorcerer
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
vomits out the soul, which he exhibits in the shape of a
small bloody ball in the open palms of his hands. He
restores it to its owner, who is lying prostrate on a mat, by
throwing it at him and then blowing on his head. The
man whose soul was swallowed has very naturally to pay
for the damage he did to the shaman as well as for his
own cure.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas in <hi rend='italic'>Eleventh Report on
the North-Western Tribes of Canada</hi>,
p. 571 (<hi rend='italic'>Report of the British Association
for 1896</hi>). For other examples of
the recapture or recovery of lost, stolen,
and strayed souls, in addition to those
which have been cited in the preceding
pages, see J. N. Vosmaer, <hi rend='italic'>Korte
Beschrijving van het Zuid-oostelijk
Schiereiland van Celebes</hi>, pp. 119-123
(this work, of which I possess a copy,
forms part of a Dutch journal which I
have not identified; it is dated Batavia,
1835); J. G. F. Riedel, <q>De Topantunuasu
of oorspronkelijke volksstammen
van Central Selebes,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van
Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>, xxxv. (1886) p.
93; J. B. Neumann, <q>Het Pane- en
Bilastroom-gebeid,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift van het
Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</hi>,
Tweede Serie, dl. iii., Afdeeling,
meer uitgebreide artikelen, No. 2
(1886), pp. 300 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. L. van der
Toorn, <q>Het animisme bei den
Minangkabauer,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van
Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>, xxxix. (1890) pp.
51 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; H. Ris, <q>De onderafdeeling
Klein Mandailing Oeloe en Pahantan,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde
van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>, xlvi.
(1896) p. 529; C. Snouck Hurgronje, <hi rend='italic'>De
Atjéhers</hi> (Batavia and Leyden, 1893-4), i.
426 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. W. Skeat, <hi rend='italic'>Malay Magic</hi>, pp.
49-51, 452-455, 570 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxiv.
(1895) pp. 128, 287; Chimkievitch,
<q>Chez les Bouriates de l'Amoor,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tour du monde</hi>, N.S. iii. (1897) pp.
622 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Father Ambrosoli, <q>Notice
sur l'île de Rook,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Annales de la
Propagation de la Foi</hi>, xxvii. (1855)
p. 364; A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des
östlichen Asien</hi>, ii. 388, iii. 236; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Völkerstämme am Brahmaputra</hi>, p.
23; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Hügelstämme Assam's,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen der Berlin. Gesell. für
Anthropol., Ethnol. und Urgeschichte</hi>,
1881, p. 156; Shway Yoe, <hi rend='italic'>The
Burman</hi>, i. 283 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. 101 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
G. M. Sproat, <hi rend='italic'>Scenes and Studies of
Savage Life</hi>, p. 214; J. Doolittle,
<hi rend='italic'>Social Life of the Chinese</hi>, pp. 110 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
(ed. Paxton Hood); T. Williams, <hi rend='italic'>Fiji
and the Fijians</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. 242; E. B. Cross,
<q>On the Karens,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
American Oriental Society</hi>, iv. (1854)
pp. 309 sq.; A. W. Howitt, <q>On
some Australian Beliefs,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xiii. (1884)
pp. 187 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>On Australian
Medicine Men,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi>
xvi. (1887) p. 41; E. P. Houghton,
<q>On the Land Dayaks of Upper Sarawak,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Memoirs of the Anthropological
Society of London</hi>, iii. (1870) pp. 196
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; L. Dahle, <q>Sikidy and Vintana,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar
Annual</hi>, xi. (1887) pp. 320 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; C.
Leemius, <hi rend='italic'>De Lapponibus Finmarchiae
eorumque lingua, vita et religione pristina
commentatio</hi> (Copenhagen, 1767),
pp. 416 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. E. Jenks, <hi rend='italic'>The Bontoc
Igorot</hi> (Manilla, 1905), pp. 199 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
C. G. Seligmann, <hi rend='italic'>The Melanesians of
British New Guinea</hi> (Cambridge, 1910),
pp. 185 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> My friend W. Robertson
Smith suggested to me that the practice
of hunting souls, which is denounced
in Ezekiel xiii. 17 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, may have been
akin to those described in the text.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='3. The Soul as a Shadow and a Reflection.'/>
<head>§ 3. The Soul as a Shadow and a Reflection.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A man's
soul conceived
as
his shadow,
so that to
injure the
shadow is
to injure
the man.</note>
But the spiritual dangers I have enumerated are not the
only ones which beset the savage. Often he regards his
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
shadow or reflection as his soul, or at all events as a vital
part of himself, and as such it is necessarily a source of
danger to him. For if it is trampled upon, struck, or
stabbed, he will feel the injury as if it were done to his
person; and if it is detached from him entirely (as he
believes that it may be) he will die. In the island of Wetar
there are magicians who can make a man ill by stabbing
his shadow with a pike or hacking it with a sword.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik- en
kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en
Papua</hi>, p. 440.</note> After
Sankara had destroyed the Buddhists in India, it is said
that he journeyed to Nepaul, where he had some difference
of opinion with the Grand Lama. To prove his supernatural
powers, he soared into the air. But as he mounted
up, the Grand Lama, perceiving his shadow swaying and
wavering on the ground, struck his knife into it and down
fell Sankara and broke his neck.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen
Asien</hi>, v. 455.</note> In the Babar Islands the
demons get power over a man's soul by holding fast his
shadow, or by striking and wounding it.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 340.</note> Among the
Tolindoos of central Celebes to tread on a man's shadow is
an offence, because it is supposed to make the owner sick;<note place='foot'>N. Adriani en A. C. Kruijt, <q>Van
Posso naar Parigi, Sigi en Lindoe,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap</hi>, xlii.
(1898) p. 511; compare A. C. Kruijt,
<hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> xliv. (1900) p. 247.</note>
and for the same reason the Toboongkoos of that region
forbid their children to play with their shadows.<note place='foot'>A. C. Kruijt, <q>Eenige ethnografische
aanteekeningen omtrent de
Toboengkoe en de Tomori,</q> <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
xliv. (1900) p. 226.</note> The
Ottawa Indians thought they could kill a man by making
certain figures on his shadow.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Annales de l'Association de la
Propagation de la Foi</hi>, iv. (1830) p.
481.</note> The Baganda of central
Africa regarded a man's shadow as his ghost; hence they
used to kill or injure their enemies by stabbing or treading
on their shadows.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, in a letter to
me dated Mengo, Uganda, May 26,
1904.</note> Among the Bavili of West Africa it
used to be considered a crime to trample on or even to cross
the shadow of another, especially if the shadow were that of
a married woman.<note place='foot'>R. E. Dennett, <q>Bavili Notes,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, xvi. (1905) p. 372; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>At
the Back of the Black Man's Mind</hi>
(London, 1906), p. 79.</note> Some Caffres are very unwilling to let
anybody stand on their shadow, believing that they can be
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
influenced for evil through it.<note place='foot'>Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>The Essential Kafir</hi>,
p. 84.</note> They think that <q>a sick
man's shadow dwindles in intensity when he is about to
die; for it has such an intimate relation to the man
that it suffers with him.</q><note place='foot'>Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>Savage Childhood</hi>,
p. 68.</note> The Ja-Luo tribes of Kavirondo,
to the east of Lake Victoria Nyanza, tell of the ancestor
of all men, Apodtho by name, who descended to earth
from above, bringing with him cattle, fowls, and seeds.
When he was old, the Ja-Luo plotted to kill him, but for a
long time they did not dare to attack him. At last, hearing
that he was sick, they thought their chance had come, and
sent a girl to see how he was. She took a small horn, used
for cupping blood, in her hand, and while she talked with
him she placed the cupping-horn on his shadow. To her
surprise it drew blood. So she returned and told her
friends that, if they wished to kill Apodtho, they must not
touch his body, but spear his shadow. They did so, and he
died and turned into a rock, which has ever since possessed
the property of sharpening spears unusually well.<note place='foot'>C. W. Hobley, <q>British East
Africa,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxxiii. (1903) pp. 327
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In a
Chinese book we read of a sage who examined human
shadows by lamplight in order to discover the fate of their
owners. <q>A man's shadow,</q> he said, <q>ought to be deep,
for, if so, he will attain honourable positions, and a great
age. Shadows are averse to being reflected in water, or in
wells, or in washing-basins. It was on such grounds that
the ancients avoided shadows, and that in old days <foreign rend='italic'>Khü-seu</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>twan-hu</foreign>, and other shadow-treading vermin caused injury by
hitting the shadows of men. In recent times there have
been men versed in the art of cauterizing the shadows of their
patients.</q> Another sapient Chinese writer observes: <q>I have
heard that, if the shadow of a bird is hit with a piece of wood
that was struck by thunder, the bird falls to the ground immediately.
I never tried it, but on account of the matter
stated above I consider the thing certain.</q><note place='foot'>J. J. M. de Groot, <hi rend='italic'>The Religious
System of China</hi>, iv. 84 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The natives of
Nias tremble at the sight of a rainbow, because they think it
is a net spread by a powerful spirit to catch their shadows.<note place='foot'>E. Modigliani, <hi rend='italic'>Viaggio a Nías</hi>, p.
620, compare p. 624.</note>
</p>

<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Danger to
a person
of letting
his shadow
fall on
certain
things. Animals
and trees also may
be injured
through
their
shadows.</note>
In the Banks Islands, Melanesia, there are certain
stones of a remarkably long shape which go by the name of
<foreign rend='italic'>tamate gangan</foreign> or <q>eating ghosts,</q> because certain powerful
and dangerous ghosts are believed to lodge in them. If a
man's shadow falls on one of these stones, the ghost will
draw his soul out from him, so that he will die. Such stones,
therefore, are set in a house to guard it; and a messenger
sent to a house by the absent owner will call out the name
of the sender, lest the watchful ghost in the stone should
fancy that he came with evil intent and should do him a
mischief.<note place='foot'>R. H. Codrington, <hi rend='italic'>The Melanesians</hi>,
p. 184.</note> In Florida, one of the Solomon Islands, there
are places sacred to ghosts, some in the village, some in the
gardens, and some in the bush. No man would pass one
of these places when the sun was so low as to cast his
shadow into it, for then the ghost would draw it from him.<note place='foot'>R. H. Codrington, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p.
176.</note>
The Indian tribes of the Lower Fraser River believe that
man has four souls, of which the shadow is one, though not
the principal, and that sickness is caused by the absence of one
of the souls. Hence no one will let his shadow fall on a sick
shaman, lest the latter should purloin it to replace his own
lost soul.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, in <hi rend='italic'>Ninth Report on the
North-Western Tribes of Canada</hi>, pp.
461 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Report of the British Association
for 1894</hi>).</note> At a funeral in China, when the lid is about to
be placed on the coffin, most of the bystanders, with the
exception of the nearest kin, retire a few steps or even retreat
to another room, for a person's health is believed to be endangered
by allowing his shadow to be enclosed in a coffin.
And when the coffin is about to be lowered into the grave
most of the spectators recoil to a little distance lest their
shadows should fall into the grave and harm should thus be
done to their persons. The geomancer and his assistants stand
on the side of the grave which is turned away from the sun;
and the grave-diggers and coffin-bearers attach their shadows
firmly to their persons by tying a strip of cloth tightly round
their waists.<note place='foot'>J. J. M. de Groot, <hi rend='italic'>The Religious
System of China</hi>, i. 94, 210 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the Nicobar Islands burial usually takes
place at sundown, before midnight, or at early dawn. In no
case can an interment be carried out at noon or within an
hour of it, lest the shadows of the bearers who lower the
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
body into the earth, or of the mourners taking their last
look at the shrouded figure, should fall into the grave; for
that would cause them to be sick or die. And when the
dead has been laid in his last home, but before the earth is
shovelled in upon him, the leaves of a certain jungle tree are
waved over the grave, and a lighted torch is brandished
inside it, to disperse any souls of the sorrowing bystanders
that may be lingering with their departed friend in his
narrow bed. Then the signal is given, and the earth or
sand is rapidly shovelled in by a party of young men who
have been standing in readiness to perform the duty.<note place='foot'>E. H. Man, <q>Notes on the
Nicobarese,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>, xxviii.
(1899) pp. 257-259. Compare Sir
R. C. Temple, in <hi rend='italic'>Census of India,
1901</hi>, iii. 209.</note>
When the Malays are building a house, and the central post
is being set up, the greatest precautions are taken to prevent
the shadow of any of the workers from falling either on the
post or on the hole dug to receive it; for otherwise they
think that sickness and trouble will be sure to follow.<note place='foot'>W. W. Skeat, <hi rend='italic'>Malay Magic</hi>, p.
143.</note>
When members of some Victorian tribes were performing
magical ceremonies for the purpose of bringing disease and
misfortune on their enemies, they took care not to let their
shadows fall on the object by which the evil influence was
supposed to be wafted to the foe.<note place='foot'>J. Dawson, <hi rend='italic'>Australian Aborigines</hi>,
p. 54.</note> In Darfur people think
that they can do an enemy to death by burying a certain
root in the earth on the spot where the shadow of his head
happens to fall. The man whose shadow is thus tampered
with loses consciousness at once and will die if the proper
antidote be not administered. In like manner they can
paralyse any limb, as a hand or leg, by planting a particular
root in the earth in the shadow of the limb they desire to
maim.<note place='foot'>Mohammed Ebn-Omar El-Tounsy,
<hi rend='italic'>Voyage au Darfour</hi>, traduit
de l'Arabe par le Dr. Perron (Paris,
1845), p. 347.</note> Nor is it human beings alone who are thus liable
to be injured by means of their shadows. Animals are to
some extent in the same predicament. A small snail, which
frequents the neighbourhood of the limestone hills in Perak,
is believed to suck the blood of cattle through their shadows;
hence the beasts grow lean and sometimes die from loss of
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
blood.<note place='foot'>W. W. Skeat, <hi rend='italic'>Malay Magic</hi>, p.
306.</note> The ancients supposed that in Arabia, if a hyæna
trod on a man's shadow, it deprived him of the power of
speech and motion; and that if a dog, standing on a roof in
the moonlight, cast a shadow on the ground and a hyæna
trod on it, the dog would fall down as if dragged with a
rope.<note place='foot'>[Aristotle] <hi rend='italic'>Mirab. Auscult.</hi> 145
(157); <hi rend='italic'>Geoponica</hi>, xv. 1. In the latter
passage, for κατάγει ἑαυτήν we must read
κατάγει αὐτόν, an emendation necessitated
by the context, and confirmed by
the passage of Damïrï quoted and
translated by Bochart, <hi rend='italic'>Hierozoicon</hi>, i.
col. 833, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cum ad lunam calcat umbram
canis, qui supra tectum est, canis ad
eam</foreign> [scil. hyaenam] <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>decidit, et ea illum
devorat</foreign>.</q> Compare W. Robertson
Smith, <hi rend='italic'>The Religion of the Semites</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
p. 129.</note> Clearly in these cases the shadow, if not equivalent
to the soul, is at least regarded as a living part of the man
or the animal, so that injury done to the shadow is felt by
the person or animal as if it were done to his body. Even
the shadows of trees are supposed by the Caffres to be
sensitive. Hence when a Caffre doctor seeks to pluck the
leaves of a tree for medicinal purposes, he <q>takes care to run
up quickly, and to avoid touching the shadow lest it should
inform the tree of the danger, and so give the tree time to
withdraw the medicinal properties from its extremities into
the safety of the inaccessible trunk. The shadow of the tree
is said to feel the touch of the man's feet.</q><note place='foot'>Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>Savage Childhood</hi>,
p. 71.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Danger of
being overshadowed
by certain
birds or
people.</note>
Conversely, if the shadow is a vital part of a man or an
animal, it may under certain circumstances be as hazardous
to be touched by it as it would be to come into contact with
the person or animal. Thus in the North-West Provinces of
India people believe that if the shadow of the goat-sucker
bird falls on an ox or a cow, but especially on a cow buffalo,
the beast will soon die. The remedy is for some one to kill
the bird, rub his hands or a stick in the blood, and then
wave the stick over the animal. There are certain men who
are noted for their powers in this respect all over the district.<note place='foot'>W. Crooke, in <hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>,
xix. (1890) p. 254.</note>
The Kaitish of central Australia hold that if the shadow of
a brown hawk falls on the breast of a woman who is suckling
a child, the breast will swell up and burst. Hence if a
woman sees one of these birds in these circumstances, she
runs away in fear.<note place='foot'>Spencer and Gillen, <hi rend='italic'>Northern
Tribes of Central Australia</hi>, p. 612.</note> In the Central Provinces of India a
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
pregnant woman avoids the shadow of a man, believing that
if it fell on her, the child would take after him in features,
though not in character.<note place='foot'>M. R. Pedlow, in <hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>,
xxix. (1900) p. 60.</note> In Shoa any obstinate disorder,
for which no remedy is known, such as insanity, epilepsy,
delirium, hysteria, and St. Vitus's dance, is traced either to
possession by a demon or to the shadow of an enemy which
has fallen on the sufferer.<note place='foot'>W. Cornwallis Harris, <hi rend='italic'>The Highlands
of Aethiopia</hi> (London, 1844),
i. 158.</note> The Bushman is most careful
not to let his shadow fall on the dead game, as he thinks
this would bring bad luck.<note place='foot'>Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>The Essential Kafir</hi>,
p. 313.</note> Amongst the Caffres to overshadow
the king by standing in his presence was an offence
worthy of instant death.<note place='foot'>D. Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 356.</note> And it is a Caffre superstition
that if the shadow of a man who is protected by a certain
charm falls on the shadow of a man who is not so protected,
the unprotected person will fall down, overcome by the
power of the charm which is transmitted through the
shadow.<note place='foot'>Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>Savage Childhood</hi>,
p. 70.</note> In the Punjaub some people believe that if the
shadow of a pregnant woman fell on a snake, it would
blind the creature instantly.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, i. p.
15, § 122.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
shadows
of certain
persons
are
regarded as
peculiarly
dangerous.
The
savage's
dread of
his mother
in-law.</note>
Hence the savage makes it a rule to shun the shadow of
certain persons whom for various reasons he regards as
sources of dangerous influence. Amongst the dangerous
classes he commonly ranks mourners and women in general,
but especially his mother-in-law. The Shuswap Indians of
British Columbia think that the shadow of a mourner falling
upon a person would make him sick.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, in <hi rend='italic'>Sixth Report on the
North-Western Tribes of Canada</hi>, pp.
92, 94 (separate reprint from the
<hi rend='italic'>Report of the British Association for
1890</hi>); compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> in <hi rend='italic'>Seventh Report</hi>,
etc., p. 13 (separate reprint from
the <hi rend='italic'>Rep. Brit. Assoc. for 1891</hi>).</note> Amongst the Kurnai
tribe of Victoria novices at initiation were cautioned not to
let a woman's shadow fall across them, as this would make
them thin, lazy, and stupid.<note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <q>The Jeraeil, or
Initiation Ceremonies of the Kurnai
Tribe,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xiv. (1885) p. 316.</note> An Australian native is said
to have once nearly died of fright because the shadow of his
mother-in-law fell on his legs as he lay asleep under a tree.<note place='foot'>Miss Mary E. B. Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore
and Legends of some Victorian
Tribes</hi> (in manuscript).</note>
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
The awe and dread with which the untutored savage
contemplates his mother-in-law are amongst the most
familiar facts of anthropology. In the Yuin tribes of New
South Wales the rule which forbade a man to hold any
communication with his wife's mother was very strict. He
might not look at her or even in her direction. It was a
ground of divorce if his shadow happened to fall on his
mother-in-law: in that case he had to leave his wife, and
she returned to her parents.<note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of
South-East Australia</hi>, p. 266.</note> In the Hunter River tribes of
New South Wales it was formerly death for a man to speak
to his mother-in-law; however, in later times the wretch who
had committed this heinous crime was suffered to live, but
he was severely reprimanded and banished for a time from
the camp.<note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 267.</note> In the Kulin tribe it was thought that if a
woman looked at or spoke to her son-in-law or even his
brother, her hair would turn white. The same result, it was
supposed, would follow if she ate of game which had been
presented to her husband by her son-in-law; but she could
obviate this ill consequence by blackening her face, and
especially her mouth, with charcoal, for then her hair would
not turn white.<note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
256 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Similarly in the Kurnai tribe of Victoria a
woman is not permitted to see her daughter's husband in
camp or elsewhere. When he is present, she keeps her
head covered with an opossum rug. The camp of the
mother-in-law faces in a different direction to that of her
son-in-law. A screen of high bushes is erected between
both huts, so that no one can see over from either. When
the mother-in-law goes for firewood, she crouches down as
she goes out or in, with her head covered.<note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 280
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare J. Dawson, <hi rend='italic'>Australian
Aborigines</hi>, pp. 32 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Uganda a
man may not see his mother-in-law nor speak to her face to
face. Should they meet by accident, she must turn aside
and cover her head with her clothes; or if her garments are
too scanty for that, she may squat on her haunches and hide
her face in her hands. If he wishes to hold any communication
with her, it must be done through a third person,
or through a wall or closed door. Were he to break these
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
rules, he would certainly be seized with a shaking of the
hands and general debility.<note place='foot'>Partly from notes sent me by my
friend the Rev. J. Roscoe, partly from
Sir H. Johnston's account (<hi rend='italic'>The Uganda
Protectorate</hi>, ii. 688). In his printed
notes (<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxxii. (1902) p. 39) Mr.
Roscoe says that the mother-in-law
<q>may be in another room out of sight
and speak to him through the wall or
open door.</q></note> Among some tribes of eastern
Africa which formerly acknowledged the suzerainty of the
sultan of Zanzibar, before a young couple had children they
might meet neither their father-in-law nor their mother-in-law.
To avoid them they must take a long roundabout.
But if they could not do that, they must throw themselves
on the ground and hide their faces till the father-in-law or
mother-in-law had passed by.<note place='foot'>Father Picarda, <q>Autour du
Mandera, Notes sur l'Ouzigoua,
l'Oukwéré et l'Oudoé (Zanguebar),</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Missions Catholiques</hi>, xviii. (1886) p.
286.</note> Among the Basutos a man
may never meet his wife's mother, nor speak to her, nor see
her. If his wife is ill and her mother comes to nurse her,
he must flee the house so long as she is in it; sentinels are
posted to warn him of her departure.<note place='foot'>Father Porte, <q>Les Réminiscences
d'un missionnaire du Basutoland,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Missions Catholiques</hi>, xxviii. (1896)
p. 318.</note> In New Britain the
native imagination fails to conceive the extent and nature of
the calamities which would result from a man's accidentally
speaking to his wife's mother; suicide of one or both would
probably be the only course open to them. The most
solemn form of oath a New Briton can take is, <q>Sir, if I
am not telling the truth, I hope I may shake hands with
my mother-in-law.</q><note place='foot'>H. H. Romily and Rev. George
Brown, in <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the Royal
Geographical Society</hi>, N.S. ix. (1887)
pp. 9, 17.</note> At Vanua Lava in the Banks Islands,
a man would not so much as follow his mother-in-law along
the beach until the rising tide had washed out her footprints
in the sand.<note place='foot'>R. H. Codrington, <hi rend='italic'>The Melanesians</hi>,
p. 43.</note> To avoid meeting his mother-in-law face to
face a very desperate Apache Indian, one of the bravest of
the brave, has been seen to clamber along the brink of a
precipice at the risk of his life, hanging on to rocks from
which had he fallen he would have been dashed to pieces or
at least have broken several of his limbs.<note place='foot'>J. G. Bourke, <hi rend='italic'>On the Border with
Crook</hi>, p. 132. More evidence of the
mutual avoidance of mother-in-law and
son-in-law among savages is collected
in my <hi rend='italic'>Totemism and Exogamy</hi>; see
the Index, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Mother-in-law.</q>
The custom is probably based on a fear
of incest between them. To the
almost universal rule of savage life
that a man must avoid his mother-in-law
there is a most remarkable exception
among the Wahehe of German
East Africa. In that tribe a bridegroom
must sleep with his mother-in-law
before he may cohabit with her
daughter. See Rev. H. Cole, <q>Notes
on the Wagogo of German East Africa,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxii. (1902) p. 312.</note> Still more curious
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
and difficult to explain is the rule which forbids certain
African kings, after the coronation ceremonies have been
completed, ever to see their own mothers again. This
restriction was imposed on the kings of Benin and Uganda.
Yet the queen-mothers lived in regal state with a court and
lands of their own. In Uganda it was thought that if the
king were to see his mother again, some evil and probably
death would surely befall him.<note place='foot'>O. Dapper, <hi rend='italic'>Description de l'Afrique</hi>,
p. 312; H. Ling Roth, <hi rend='italic'>Great Benin</hi>,
p. 119; <hi rend='italic'>Missions Catholiques</hi>, xv.
(1883) p. 110; J. Roscoe, <q>Further
Notes on the Manners and Customs
of the Baganda,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxxii. (1902)
p. 67.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A man's
health and
strength
supposed
to vary
with the
length of
his
shadow. Fear of
the loss
of the
shadow.
Fear
of the resemblance
of a child
to its
parents.</note>
Where the shadow is regarded as so intimately bound
up with the life of the man that its loss entails debility or
death, it is natural to expect that its diminution should be
regarded with solicitude and apprehension, as betokening a
corresponding decrease in the vital energy of its owner.
An elegant Greek rhetorician has compared the man who
lives only for fame to one who should set all his heart on
his shadow, puffed up and boastful when it lengthened, sad
and dejected when it shortened, wasting and pining away
when it dwindled to nothing. The spirits of such an one, he
goes on, would necessarily be volatile, since they must rise
or fall with every passing hour of the day. In the morning,
when the level sun, just risen above the eastern horizon,
stretched out his shadow to enormous length, rivalling the
shadows cast by the cypresses and the towers on the city
wall, how blithe and exultant would he be, fancying that in
stature he had become a match for the fabled giants of old;
with what a lofty port he would then strut and shew himself
in the streets and the market-place and wherever men congregated,
that he might be seen and admired of all. But
as the day wore on, his countenance would change and he
would slink back crestfallen to his house. At noon, when
his once towering shadow had shrunk to his feet, he would
shut himself up and refuse to stir abroad, ashamed to look
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
his fellow-townsmen in the face; but in the afternoon his
drooping spirits would revive, and as the day declined his
joy and pride would swell again with the length of the evening
shadows.<note place='foot'>Dio Chrysostom, <hi rend='italic'>Or.</hi> lxvii. vol.
ii. p. 230, ed. L. Dindorf.</note> The rhetorician who thus sought to expose
the vanity of fame as an object of human ambition by likening
it to an ever-changing shadow, little dreamed that in
real life there were men who set almost as much store by
their shadows as the fool whom he had conjured up in his
imagination to point a moral. So hard is it for the straining
wings of fancy to outstrip the folly of mankind. In
Amboyna and Uliase, two islands near the equator, where
necessarily there is little or no shadow cast at noon, the
people make it a rule not to go out of the house at mid-day,
because they fancy that by doing so a man may lose the
shadow of his soul.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik- en
kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en
Papua</hi>, p. 61.</note> The Mangaians tell of a mighty
warrior, Tukaitawa, whose strength waxed and waned with
the length of his shadow. In the morning, when his shadow
fell longest, his strength was greatest; but as the shadow
shortened towards noon his strength ebbed with it, till exactly
at noon it reached its lowest point; then, as the shadow
stretched out in the afternoon, his strength returned. A
certain hero discovered the secret of Tukaitawa's strength
and slew him at noon.<note place='foot'>W. W. Gill, <hi rend='italic'>Myths and Songs of
the South Pacific</hi>, pp. 284 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The savage Besisis of the Malay
Peninsula fear to bury their dead at noon, because they
fancy that the shortness of their shadows at that hour would
sympathetically shorten their own lives.<note place='foot'>W. W. Skeat and C. O. Blagden.
<hi rend='italic'>Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula</hi>
(London, 1906), ii. 110.</note> The Baganda of
central Africa used to judge of a man's health by the length of
his shadow. They said, <q>So-and-so is going to die, his shadow
is very small</q>; or, <q>He is in good health, his shadow is
large.</q><note place='foot'>The Rev. J. Roscoe, in a letter to
me dated Mengo, Uganda, May 26,
1904.</note> Similarly the Caffres of South Africa think that a
man's shadow grows very small or vanishes at death. When
her husband is away at the wars, a woman hangs up his sleeping-mat;
if the shadow grows less, she says her husband is
killed; if it remains unchanged, she says he is unscathed.<note place='foot'>T. Arbousset et F. Daumas, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage
d'exploration</hi> (Paris, 1842), p. 291;
Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>The Essential Kafir</hi>, pp.
83, 303; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Savage Childhood</hi>, p. 69.
In the last passage Mr. Kidd tells
us that <q>the mat was <emph>not</emph> held up in
the sun, but was placed in the hut at
the marked-off portion where the <foreign rend='italic'>itongo</foreign>
or ancestral spirit was supposed to live;
and the fate of the man was divined,
not by the <emph>length</emph> of the shadow, but
by its <emph>strength</emph>.</q></note>
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
It is possible that even in lands outside the tropics the
observation of the diminished shadow at noon may have
contributed, even if it did not give rise, to the superstitious
dread with which that hour has been viewed by many peoples,
as by the Greeks, ancient and modern, the Bretons, the
Russians, the Roumanians of Transylvania, and the Indians
of Santiago Tepehuacan.<note place='foot'>Theocritus, i. 15 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Philostratus,
<hi rend='italic'>Heroic.</hi> i. 3; Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>De antro nympharum</hi>,
26; Lucan, iii. 423 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
Drexler, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Meridianus daemon,</q>
in Roscher's <hi rend='italic'>Lexikon der griech. und
röm. Mythologie</hi>, ii. 2832 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Bernard
Schmidt, <hi rend='italic'>Das Volksleben der
Neugriechen</hi>, pp. 94 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 119 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Georgeakis et Pineau, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore de Lesbos</hi>,
p. 342; A. de Nore, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes,
mythes, et traditions des provinces de
France</hi>, pp. 214 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. Grimm,
<hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii. 972; C. L.
Rochholz, <hi rend='italic'>Deutscher Glaube und
Brauch</hi>, i. 62 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; E. Gerard, <hi rend='italic'>The
Land beyond the Forest</hi>, i. 331;
<q>Lettre du curé de Santiago Tepehuacan,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de la Société de
Géographie</hi> (Paris), IIme Série, ii.
(1834) p. 180; N. von Stenin, <q>Die
Permier,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxxi. (1897) p.
374; D. Louwerier, <q>Bijgeloovige
gebruiken, die door die Javanen worden
in acht genomen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van
wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xlix. (1905) p. 257.</note> In this observation, too, we may
perhaps detect the reason why noon was chosen by the
Greeks as the hour for sacrificing to the shadowless dead.<note place='foot'>Schol. on Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Frogs</hi>, 293.</note>
The loss of the shadow, real or apparent, has often been
regarded as a cause or precursor of death. Whoever entered
the sanctuary of Zeus on Mount Lycaeus in Arcadia was
believed to lose his shadow and to die within the year.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, viii. 38. 6; Polybius,
xvi. 12. 7; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaestiones
Graecae</hi>, 39.</note> In
Lower Austria on the evening of St. Sylvester's day&mdash;the
last day of the year&mdash;the company seated round the table
mark whose shadow is not cast on the wall, and believe that
the seemingly shadowless person will die next year. Similar
presages are drawn in Germany both on St. Sylvester's day
and on Christmas Eve.<note place='foot'>Th. Vernaleken, <hi rend='italic'>Mythen und
Bräuche des Volkes in Österreich</hi>,
p. 341; Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>Das
festliche Jahr</hi>, p. 401; A. Wuttke,
<hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p. 207,
§ 314.</note> The Galelareese fancy that if a
child resembles his father, they will not both live long; for
the child has taken away his father's likeness or shadow, and
consequently the father must soon die.<note place='foot'>M. J. van Baarda, <q>Fabelen,
Verhalen en Overleveringen der Galelareezen,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land-
en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>,
xlv. (1895) p. 459.</note> Similarly among
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
some tribes of the Lower Congo, <q>if the child is like its
mother, father, or uncle, they think it has the spirit of the
person it resembles, and that that person will soon die.
Hence a parent will resent it if you say that the baby is like
him or her.</q><note place='foot'>J. H. Weeks, <q>Notes on some
Customs of the Lower Congo People,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, xix. (1908) p. 422.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
shadows of
people
built into
foundations
to
strengthen
the edifices.</note>
Nowhere, perhaps, does the equivalence of the shadow
to the life or soul come out more clearly than in some
customs practised to this day in south-eastern Europe. In
modern Greece, when the foundation of a new building is
being laid, it is the custom to kill a cock, a ram, or a lamb,
and to let its blood flow on the foundation-stone, under
which the animal is afterwards buried. The object of the
sacrifice is to give strength and stability to the building.
But sometimes, instead of killing an animal, the builder
entices a man to the foundation-stone, secretly measures his
body, or a part of it, or his shadow, and buries the measure
under the foundation-stone; or he lays the foundation-stone
upon the man's shadow. It is believed that the man will
die within the year.<note place='foot'>B. Schmidt, <hi rend='italic'>Das Volksleben der
Neugriechen</hi> (Leipsic, 1871), pp. 196
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the island of Lesbos it is deemed
enough if the builder merely casts a stone at the shadow of
a passer-by; the man whose shadow is thus struck will die,
but the building will be solid.<note place='foot'>Georgeakis et Pineau, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore de
Lesbos</hi>, pp. 346 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> A Bulgarian mason measures
the shadow of a man with a string, places the string in a
box, and then builds the box into the wall of the edifice.
Within forty days thereafter the man whose shadow was
measured will be dead and his soul will be in the box beside
the string; but often it will come forth and appear in its
former shape to persons who were born on a Saturday. If
a Bulgarian builder cannot obtain a human shadow for this
purpose, he will content himself with measuring the shadow
of the first animal that comes that way.<note place='foot'>A. Strausz, <hi rend='italic'>Die Bulgaren</hi> (Leipsic,
1898), p. 199; W. R. S. Ralston,
<hi rend='italic'>Songs of the Russian People</hi>, p.
127.</note> The Roumanians
of Transylvania think that he whose shadow is thus immured
will die within forty days; so persons passing by a building
which is in course of erection may hear a warning cry,
<q>Beware lest they take thy shadow!</q> Not long ago there
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
were still shadow-traders whose business it was to provide
architects with the shadows necessary for securing their
walls.<note place='foot'>W. Schmidt, <hi rend='italic'>Das Jahr und seine
Tage in Meinung und Brauch der
Romänen Siebenbürgens</hi> (Hermannstadt,
1866), p. 27; E. Gerard, <hi rend='italic'>The
Land beyond the Forest</hi>, ii. 17 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
Compare F. S. Krauss, <hi rend='italic'>Volksglaube
und religiöser Brauch der Südslaven</hi>,
p. 161.</note> In these cases the measure of the shadow is looked
on as equivalent to the shadow itself, and to bury it is to
bury the life or soul of the man, who, deprived of it, must
die. Thus the custom is a substitute for the old practice of
immuring a living person in the walls, or crushing him under
the foundation-stone of a new building, in order to give
strength and durability to the structure, or more definitely in
order that the angry ghost may haunt the place and guard
it against the intrusion of enemies. Thus when a new gate
was made or an old gate was repaired in the walls of Bangkok,
it used to be customary to crush three men to death
under an enormous beam in a pit at the gateway. Before
they were led to their doom, they were regaled at a splendid
banquet; the whole court came to salute them; and the
king himself charged them straitly to guard well the gate
that was to be committed to their care, and to warn him
if enemies or rebels came to assault the city. The next
moment the ropes were cut and the beam descended on
them. The Siamese believed that these unfortunates were
transformed into the genii which they called <foreign rend='italic'>phi</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Mgr. Bruguière, in <hi rend='italic'>Annales de
l'Association de la Propagation de la
Foi</hi>, v. (1831) pp. 164 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Pallegoix,
<hi rend='italic'>Description du royaume Thai ou Siam</hi>,
ii. 50-52.</note> It is said
that when the massive teak posts of the gateways of Mandalay
were set up, a man was bound and placed under each post
and crushed to death. The Burmese believe that men who
die a violent death turn into <foreign rend='italic'>nats</foreign> or demons and haunt the
spot where they were killed, doing a mischief to such as
attempt to molest the place. Thus their spirits become
guardians of the gates.<note place='foot'>A. Fytche, <hi rend='italic'>Burma, Past and
Present</hi> (London, 1878), i. 251 note.</note> This theory would explain why
such sacrifices appear to be offered most commonly at
thoroughfares, such as gates and bridges, where ghostly
warders may be deemed especially serviceable in keeping;
watch on the multitudes that go to and fro.<note place='foot'>On such practices in general, see
E. B. Tylor, <hi rend='italic'>Primitive Culture</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i.
104 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; F. Liebrecht, <hi rend='italic'>Zur Volkskunde</hi>, pp. 284-296; F. S. Krauss,
<q>Der Bauopfer bei den Südslaven,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen der Anthropologischen
Gesellschaft in Wien</hi>, xvii. (1887) pp.
16-24; P. Sartori, <q>Über das
Bauopfer,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</hi>,
xxx. (1898) pp. 1-54; E. Westermarck,
<hi rend='italic'>Origin and Development of the
Moral Ideas</hi> (London, 1906-1908), i.
461 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> For some special evidence, see
H. Oldenberg, <hi rend='italic'>Die Religion des Veda</hi>,
pp. 363 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> (as to ancient India);
Sonnerat, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage aux Indes Orientales
et à la Chine</hi>, ii. 47 (as to Pegu);
Guerlach, <q>Chez les sauvages Bahnars,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Missions Catholiques</hi>, xvi.
(1884) p. 82 (as to the Sedans of
Cochin-China); W. H. Furness, <hi rend='italic'>Home-life
of Borneo Head-hunters</hi>, p. 3 (as to
the Kayans and Kenyahs of Burma);
A. C. Kruijt, <q>Van Paloppo naar
Posso,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege het
Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xlii. (1898) p. 56 note (as to central
Celebes); L. Hearn, <hi rend='italic'>Glimpses of Unfamiliar
Japan</hi> (London, 1894), i. 148
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; H. Ternaux-Compans, <hi rend='italic'>Essai sur
l'ancien Cundinamarca</hi>, p. 70 (as to
the Indians of Colombia). These customs
are commonly called foundation-sacrifices.
But the name is inappropriate,
as Prof. H. Oldenberg has
rightly observed, since they are not
sacrifices but charms.</note> In Bima, a
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
district of the East Indian island of Sambawa, the custom is
marked by some peculiar features, which deserve to be
mentioned. When a new flag-pole is set up at the sultan's
palace a woman is crushed to death under it; but she must
be pregnant. If the destined victim should be brought to
bed before her execution, she goes free. The notion may
be that the ghost of such a woman would be more than
usually fierce and vigilant. Again, when the wooden doors
are set up at the palace, it is customary to bury a child
under each of the door-posts. For these purposes officers
are sent to scour the country for a pregnant woman or little
children, as the case may be, and if they come back empty-handed
they must give up their own wives or children to
serve as victims. When the gates are set up, the children
are killed, their bodies stript of flesh, and their bones laid in
the holes in which the door-posts are erected. Then the
flesh is boiled with horse's flesh and served up to the officers.
Any officer who refuses to eat of it is at once cut down.<note place='foot'>D. F. van Braam Morris, in
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land-
en Volkenkunde</hi>, xxxiv. (1891) p.
224.</note>
The intention of this last practice is perhaps to secure the
fidelity of the officers by compelling them to enter into a
covenant of the most solemn and binding nature with the
ghosts of the murdered children who are to guard the gates.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Deification
of a
measuring
tape.</note>
The practice of burying the measure of a man's shadow,
as a substitute for the man himself, under the foundation-stone
of a building may perhaps throw light on the singular
deity whom the people of Kisser, an East Indian island,
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
choose to guard their houses and villages. The god in
question is nothing more or less than the measuring-tape
which was used to measure the foundations of the house or
of the village temple. After it has served this useful
purpose, the tape is wound about a stick shaped like a
paddle, and is then deposited in the thatch of the roof of the
house, where food is offered to it on all special occasions. The
deified measuring-tape of the whole village is that which was
used to measure the foundations of the first house or of the
village temple. The handle of the paddle-like stick on
which it is wound is carved into the figure of a person
squatting in the usual posture; and the whole is kept in a
rough wooden box along with one or two figures to act as
its guards.<note place='foot'>J. H. de Vries, <q>Reis door eenige
eilandgroepen der Residentie Amboina,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift van het koninklijk
Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</hi>,
Tweedie Serie, xvii. (1900) pp.
612 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> It is possible, though perhaps hardly probable,
that these tapes may be thought to contain the souls of men
whose shadows they measured at the foundation ceremony.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The soul
sometimes
supposed
to be in
the reflection. Dangers
to which
the reflection-soul
is
exposed.</note>
As some peoples believe a man's soul to be in his
shadow, so other (or the same) peoples believe it to be in
his reflection in water or a mirror. Thus <q>the Andamanese
do not regard their shadows but their reflections (in any
mirror) as their souls.</q><note place='foot'>E. H. Mann, <hi rend='italic'>Aboriginal Inhabitants
of the Andaman Islands</hi>, p. 94.</note> According to one account, some
of the Fijians thought that man has two souls, a light one
and a dark one; the dark one goes to Hades, the light one
is his reflection in water or a mirror.<note place='foot'>T. Williams, <hi rend='italic'>Fiji and the Fijians</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
i. 241. However, the late Mr.
Lorimer Fison wrote to me that
this reported belief in a bright
soul and a dark soul <q>is one of
Williams' absurdities. I inquired into
it on the island where he was, and
found that there was no such belief.
He took the word for <q>shadow,</q> which
is a reduplication of <foreign rend='italic'>yalo</foreign>, the word for
soul, as meaning the dark soul. But
<foreign rend='italic'>yaloyalo</foreign> does not mean the soul at all.
It is not part of a man as his soul is.
This is made certain by the fact that
it does not take the possessive suffix
<foreign rend='italic'>yalo-na</foreign> = his soul; but <foreign rend='italic'>nona yaloyalo</foreign> =
his shadow. This settles the question
beyond dispute. If <foreign rend='italic'>yaloyalo</foreign> were any
kind of soul, the possessive form would
be <foreign rend='italic'>yaloyalona</foreign></q> (letter dated August
26, 1898).</note> When the Motumotu
of New Guinea first saw their likenesses in a looking-glass
they thought that their reflections were their souls.<note place='foot'>James Chalmers, <hi rend='italic'>Pioneering in
New Guinea</hi> (London, 1887), p. 170.</note> In
New Caledonia the old men are of opinion that a person's
reflection in water or a mirror is his soul; but the younger men,
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
taught by the Catholic priests, maintain that it is a reflection
and nothing more, just like the reflection of palm-trees in the
water.<note place='foot'>Father Lambert, <hi rend='italic'>Mœurs et superstitions
des Néo-Calédoniens</hi> (Nouméa,
1900), pp. 45 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The reflection-soul, being external to the man, is
exposed to much the same dangers as the shadow-soul.
Among the Galelareese, half-grown lads and girls may not
look at themselves in a mirror; for they say that the mirror
takes away their bloom and leaves them ugly.<note place='foot'>M. J. van Baarda, <q>Fabelen,
Verhalen en Overleveringen der Galelareezen,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land-
en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>,
xlv. (1895) p. 462.</note> And as the
shadow may be stabbed, so may the reflection. Hence an
Aztec mode of keeping sorcerers from the house was to leave
a vessel of water with a knife in it behind the door. When
a sorcerer entered he was so much alarmed at seeing his
reflection in the water transfixed by a knife that he turned
and fled.<note place='foot'>B. de Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire générale des
choses de la Nouvelle-Espagne</hi> (Paris,
1880), p. 314. The Chinese hang
brass mirrors over the idols in their
houses, because it is thought that evil
spirits entering the house and seeing
themselves in the mirrors will be scared
away (<hi rend='italic'>China Review</hi>, ii. 164).</note> In Corrèze, a district of the Auvergne, a cow's
milk had dried up through the maleficent spells of a neighbouring
witch, so a sorcerer was called in to help. He made
the woman whose cow was bewitched sit in front of a pail of
water with a knife in her hand till she thought she saw the
image of the witch in the water, whereupon he made her
stab the image with the knife. They say that if the knife
strikes the image fair in the eye, the person whose likeness it
is will suffer a corresponding injury in his or her eye. This
procedure, we are informed, has been successful in restoring
milk to the udders of a cow when even holy water had been
tried in vain.<note place='foot'>G. Vuillier, <q>Chez les magiciens
et les sorciers de la Corrèze,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tour du
monde</hi>, N.S. v. (1899) pp. 522, 524.</note> The Zulus will not look into a dark pool
because they think there is a beast in it which will take
away their reflections, so that they die.<note place='foot'>H. Callaway, <hi rend='italic'>Nursery Tales, Traditions,
and Histories of the Zulus</hi>
(Natal and London, 1868), p. 342.</note> The Basutos say
that crocodiles have the power of thus killing a man by
dragging his reflection under water. When one of them
dies suddenly and from no apparent cause, his relatives will
allege that a crocodile must have taken his shadow some
time when he crossed a stream.<note place='foot'>T. Arbousset et F. Daumas, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage
d'exploration au nord-est de la colonie
du Cap de Bonne-Espérance</hi>, p. 12; T.
Lindsay Fairclough, <q>Notes on the
Basuto,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the African
Society</hi>, No. 14 (January 1905), p. 201.</note> In Saddle Island,
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
Melanesia, there is a pool <q>into which if any one looks he
dies; the malignant spirit takes hold upon his life by means
of his reflection on the water.</q><note place='foot'>R. H. Codrington, <q>Religious
Beliefs and Practices in Melanesia,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi> x. (1881) p. 313;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Melanesians</hi>, p. 186.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dread of
looking at
one's
reflection
in water.</note>
We can now understand why it was a maxim both in
ancient India and ancient Greece not to look at one's
reflection in water, and why the Greeks regarded it as an
omen of death if a man dreamed of seeing himself so
reflected.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Fragmenta philosophorum Graecorum</hi>,
ed. F. G. A. Mullach, i. 510;
Artemidorus, <hi rend='italic'>Onirocr.</hi> ii. 7; <hi rend='italic'>Laws of
Manu</hi>, iv. 38 (p. 135, G. Bühler's
translation, <hi rend='italic'>Sacred Books of the East</hi>,
vol. xxv.).</note> They feared that the water-spirits would drag
the person's reflection or soul under water, leaving him soulless
to perish. This was probably the origin of the classical
story of the beautiful Narcissus, who languished and died
through seeing his reflection in the water. The explanation
that he died for love of his own fair image was
probably devised later, after the old meaning of the story
was forgotten. The same ancient belief lingers, in a faded
form, in the English superstition that whoever sees a water
fairy must pine and die.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Alas, the moon should ever beam</hi></q></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>To show what man should never see!&mdash;</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>I saw a maiden on a stream,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>And fair was she!</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>I staid to watch, a little space,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Her parted lips if she would sing;</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>The waters closed above her face</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>With many a ring.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>I know my life will fade away,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>I know that I must vainly pine,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>For I am made of mortal clay,</hi></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>But she's divine!</hi></q></l>
</lg>

</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Reason for
covering
up mirrors
or turning
them to
the wall
after a
death.</note>
Further, we can now explain the widespread custom of
covering up mirrors or turning them to the wall after a death
has taken place in the house. It is feared that the soul,
projected out of the person in the shape of his reflection in
the mirror, may be carried off by the ghost of the departed,
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
which is commonly supposed to linger about the house till
the burial. The custom is thus exactly parallel to the Aru
custom of not sleeping in a house after a death for fear that
the soul, projected out of the body in a dream, may meet
the ghost and be carried off by it.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>.</note> In Oldenburg it is thought
that if a person sees his image in a mirror after a death he
will die himself. So all the mirrors in the house are covered
up with white cloth.<note place='foot'>A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
pp. 429 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, § 726.</note> In some parts of Germany and
Belgium after a death not only the mirrors but everything
that shines or glitters (windows, clocks, etc.) is covered up,<note place='foot'>A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>; E. Monseur, <hi rend='italic'>Le
Folklore Wallon</hi>, p. 40.</note>
doubtless because they might reflect a person's image. The
same custom of covering up mirrors or turning them to the
wall after a death prevails in England, Scotland, Madagascar,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Journal</hi>, iii. (1885) p.
281; T. F. Thiselton Dyer, <hi rend='italic'>English
Folk-lore</hi>, p. 109; J. Napier, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore,
or Superstitious Beliefs in the West of
Scotland</hi>, p. 60; W. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>History of
Madagascar</hi>, i. 238. Compare A.
Grandidier, <q>Des rites funéraires chez
les Malgaches,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue d'Ethnographie</hi>,
v. (1886) p. 215.</note>
and among the Karaits, a Jewish sect in the Crimea.<note place='foot'>S. Weissenberg, <q>Die Karäer der
Krim,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxxxiv. (1903) p. 143;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> <q>Krankheit und Tod bei den
südrussischen Juden,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, xci.
(1907) p. 360.</note> The
Suni Mohammedans of Bombay cover with a cloth the mirror
in the room of a dying man and do not remove it until the
corpse is carried out for burial. They also cover the looking-glasses
in their bedrooms before retiring to rest at night.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, ii. p.
169, § 906.</note>
The reason why sick people should not see themselves in a
mirror, and why the mirror in a sick-room is therefore
covered up,<note place='foot'>J. V. Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben und
Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</hi>,
p. 151, § 1097; <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Journal</hi>, vi.
(1888) pp. 145 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>: <hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and
Queries</hi>, ii. p. 61, § 378.</note> is also plain; in time of sickness, when the soul
might take flight so easily, it is particularly dangerous to
project it out of the body by means of the reflection
in a mirror. The rule is therefore precisely parallel to the
rule observed by some peoples of not allowing sick people
to sleep;<note place='foot'>J. G. Frazer, <q>On certain Burial
Customs as illustrative of the Primitive
Theory of the Soul,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xv. (1886) pp. 82
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Among the heathen Arabs, when a
man had been stung by a scorpion, he was
kept from sleeping for seven days, during
which he had to wear a woman's bracelets
and earrings (Rasmussen, <hi rend='italic'>Additamenta
ad historiam Arabum ante Islamismum</hi>,
p. 65, compare p. 69). The
old Mexican custom of masking and
the images of the gods so long
as the king was sick (Brasseur de Bourbourg,
<hi rend='italic'>Histoire des nations civilisées
du Mexique et de l'Amérique-Centrale</hi>,
iii. 571 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>) may perhaps have been
intended to prevent the images from
drawing away the king's soul.</note> for in sleep the soul is projected out of the body,
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
and there is always a risk that it may not return. <q>In the
opinion of the Raskolniks a mirror is an accursed thing,
invented by the devil,</q><note place='foot'>W. R. S. Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Songs of the
Russian People</hi>, p. 117. The objection,
however, may be merely Puritanical.
W. Robertson Smith informed me that
the peculiarities of the Raskolniks are
largely due to exaggerated Puritanism.</note> perhaps on account of the mirror's
supposed power of drawing out the soul in the reflection and
so facilitating its capture.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The soul
sometimes
supposed
to be in the
portrait.
This belief
among the
Esquimaux
and
American
Indians.</note>
As with shadows and reflections, so with portraits; they
are often believed to contain the soul of the person portrayed.
People who hold this belief are naturally loth to
have their likenesses taken; for if the portrait is the soul,
or at least a vital part of the person portrayed, whoever
possesses the portrait will be able to exercise a fatal influence
over the original of it. Thus the Esquimaux of Bering Strait
believe that persons dealing in witchcraft have the power of
stealing a person's <foreign rend='italic'>inua</foreign> or shade, so that without it he will
pine away and die. Once at a village on the lower Yukon
River an explorer had set up his camera to get a picture
of the people as they were moving about among their houses.
While he was focusing the instrument, the headman of the
village came up and insisted on peeping under the cloth.
Being allowed to do so, he gazed intently for a minute at
the moving figures on the ground glass, then suddenly withdrew
his head and bawled at the top of his voice to the people,
<q>He has all of your shades in this box.</q> A panic ensued among
the group, and in an instant they disappeared helter-skelter
into their houses.<note place='foot'>E. W. Nelson, <q>The Eskimo
about Bering Strait,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Eighteenth
Annual Report of the Bureau of
American Ethnology</hi>, Part I. (Washington,
1899) p. 422.</note> The Dacotas hold that every man has
several <foreign rend='italic'>wanagi</foreign> or <q>apparitions,</q> of which after death one
remains at the grave, while another goes to the place of the
departed. For many years no Yankton Dacota would consent
to have his picture taken lest one of his <q>apparitions</q> should
remain after death in the picture instead of going to the
spirit-land.<note place='foot'>J. Owen Dorsey, <q>A Study of
Siouan Cults,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Eleventh Annual Report
of the Bureau of Ethnology</hi>
(Washington, 1894), p. 484; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>
<q>Teton Folk-lore,</q> <hi rend='italic'>American Anthropologist</hi>,
ii. (1889) p. 143.</note> An Indian whose portrait the Prince of Wied
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
wished to get, refused to let himself be drawn, because he
believed it would cause his death.<note place='foot'>Maximilian Prinz zu Wied, <hi rend='italic'>Reise
in das innere Nord-America</hi>, i. 417.</note> The Mandan Indians
also thought that they would soon die if their portraits were
in the hands of another; they wished at least to have the
artist's picture as a kind of hostage.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> ii. 166.</note> The Tepehuanes of
Mexico stood in mortal terror of the camera, and five days'
persuasion was necessary to induce them to pose for it.
When at last they consented, they looked like criminals
about to be executed. They believed that by photographing
people the artist could carry off their souls and devour them
at his leisure moments. They said that when the pictures
reached his country they would die or some other evil would
befall them.<note place='foot'>C. Lumholtz, <hi rend='italic'>Unknown Mexico</hi>
(London, 1903), i. 459 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Canelos Indians of Ecuador think that
their soul is carried away in their picture. Two of them,
who had been photographed, were so alarmed that they came
back next day on purpose to ask if it were really true that
their souls had been taken away.<note place='foot'>A. Simson, <q>Notes on the
Jivaros and Canelos Indians,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Anthropological Institute</hi>, ix.
(1880) p. 392.</note> Similar notions are entertained
by the Aymara Indians of Peru and Bolivia.<note place='foot'>D. Forbes, in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Ethnological Society of London</hi>, ii.
(1870) p. 236.</note> The
Araucanians of Chili are unwilling to have their portraits
drawn, for they fancy that he who has their portraits in his
possession could, by means of magic, injure or destroy
themselves.<note place='foot'>E. R. Smith, <hi rend='italic'>The Araucanians</hi>
(London, 1855), p. 222.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The same
belief in
Africa.</note>
The Yaos, a tribe of British Central Africa in the neighbourhood
of Lake Nyassa, believe that every human being
has a <foreign rend='italic'>lisoka</foreign>, a soul, shade, or spirit, which they appear to
associate with the shadow or picture of the person. Some
of them have been known to refuse to enter a room where
pictures were hung on the walls, <q>because of the <foreign rend='italic'>masoka</foreign>,
souls, in them.</q> The camera was at first an object of dread
to them, and when it was turned on a group of natives
they scattered in all directions with shrieks of terror. They
said that the European was about to take away their shadows
and that they would die; the transference of the shadow or
portrait (for the Yao word for the two is the same, to wit
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
<foreign rend='italic'>chiwilili</foreign>) to the photographic plate would involve the disease
or death of the shadeless body. A Yao chief, after much
difficulty, allowed himself to be photographed on condition
that the picture should be shewn to none of his subjects, but
sent out of the country as soon as possible. He feared lest
some ill-wisher might use it to bewitch him. Some time
afterwards he fell ill, and his attendants attributed the illness
to some accident which had befallen the photographic plate
in England.<note place='foot'>Rev. A. Hetherwick, <q>Some
Animistic Beliefs among the Yaos of
British Central Africa,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxii. (1902)
pp. 89 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Ngoni of the same region entertain a
similar belief, and formerly exhibited a similar dread of
sitting to a photographer, lest by so doing they should yield
up their shades or spirits to him and they should die.<note place='foot'>W. A. Elmslie, <hi rend='italic'>Among the Wild
Ngoni</hi> (Edinburgh and London, 1899),
pp. 70 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When
Joseph Thomson attempted to photograph some of the
Wa-teita in eastern Africa, they imagined that he was a
magician trying to obtain possession of their souls, and that
if he got their likenesses they themselves would be entirely
at his mercy.<note place='foot'>J. Thomson, <hi rend='italic'>Through Masai
Land</hi> (London, 1885), p. 86.</note> When Dr. Catat and some companions were
exploring the Bara country on the west coast of Madagascar,
the people suddenly became hostile. The day before the
travellers, not without difficulty, had photographed the royal
family, and now found themselves accused of taking the
souls of the natives for the purpose of selling them when
they returned to France. Denial was vain; in compliance
with the custom of the country they were obliged to catch
the souls, which were then put into a basket and ordered by
Dr. Catat to return to their respective owners.<note place='foot'>E. Clodd, in <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, vi. (1895)
pp. 73 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, referring to <hi rend='italic'>The Times</hi> of
March 24, 1891.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The same
belief in
Asia and the East Indies.</note>
Some villagers in Sikhim betrayed a lively horror and
hid away whenever the lens of a camera, or <q>the evil eye of
the box</q> as they called it, was turned on them. They
thought it took away their souls with their pictures, and so
put it in the power of the owner of the pictures to cast spells
on them, and they alleged that a photograph of the scenery
blighted the landscape.<note place='foot'>L. A. Waddell, <hi rend='italic'>Among the Himalayas</hi>
(Westminster, 1899), pp. 85
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Until the reign of the late King
of Siam no Siamese coins were ever stamped with the image
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
of the king, <q>for at that time there was a strong prejudice
against the making of portraits in any medium. Europeans
who travel into the jungle have, even at the present time,
only to point a camera at a crowd to procure its instant
dispersion. When a copy of the face of a person is made
and taken away from him, a portion of his life goes with the
picture. Unless the sovereign had been blessed with the
years of a Methusaleh he could scarcely have permitted his
life to be distributed in small pieces together with the coins
of the realm.</q><note place='foot'>E. Young, <hi rend='italic'>The Kingdom of the
Yellow Robe</hi> (Westminster, 1898), p.
140.</note> Similarly, in Corea, <q>the effigy of the king
is not struck on the coins; only a few Chinese characters
are put on them. They would deem it an insult to the king
to put his sacred face on objects which pass into the most
vulgar hands and often roll on the ground in the dust or the
mud. When the French ships arrived for the first time in
Corea, the mandarin who was sent on board to communicate
with them was dreadfully shocked to see the levity with
which these western barbarians treated the face of their
sovereign, reproduced on the coins, and the recklessness with
which they put it in the hands of the first comer, without
troubling themselves in the least whether or not he would
shew it due respect.</q><note place='foot'>Ch. Dallet, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de l'Église
de Corée</hi> (Paris, 1874), i. p. xxv. This
account of Corea was written at a time
when the country was still almost
secluded from European influence.
The events of recent years have naturally
wrought great changes in the
habits and ideas of the people.</note> In Minahassa, a district of Celebes,
many chiefs are reluctant to be photographed, believing that
if that were done they would soon die. For they imagine
that, were the photograph lost by its owner and found by
somebody else, whatever injury the finder chose to do to the
portrait would equally affect the person whom it represented.<note place='foot'><q>Iets over het bijgeloof in de
Minahasa,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch
Indië</hi>, III. Série, iv. (1870)
pp. 8 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Mortal terror was depicted on the faces of the Battas upon
whom von Brenner turned the lens of his camera; they
thought he wished to carry off their shadows or spirits in a
little box.<note place='foot'>J. Freiherr von Brenner, <hi rend='italic'>Besuch
bei den Kannibalen Sumatras</hi> (Würzburg,
1894), p. 195.</note> When Dr. Nieuwenhuis attempted to photograph
the Kayans or Bahaus of central Borneo, they were much
alarmed, fearing that their souls would follow their photographs
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
into the far country and that their deserted bodies
would fall sick. Further, they imagined that possessing
their likenesses the explorer would be able by magic art
to work on the originals at a distance.<note place='foot'>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>Quer durch
Borneo</hi>, i. 314.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The same
belief in
Europe.</note>
Beliefs of the same sort still linger in various parts of
Europe. Not very many years ago some old women in the
Greek island of Carpathus were very angry at having their
likenesses drawn, thinking that in consequence they would
pine and die.<note place='foot'><q>A Far-off Greek Island,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Blackwood's
Magazine</hi>, February 1886, p.
235.</note> It is a German superstition that if you have
your portrait painted, you will die.<note place='foot'>J. A. E. Köhler, <hi rend='italic'>Volksbrauch,
Aberglauben, Sagen und andre alte
Überlieferungen im Voigtlande</hi> (Leipsic,
1867), p. 423.</note> Some people in Russia
object to having their silhouettes taken, fearing that if this
is done they will die before the year is out.<note place='foot'>W. R. S. Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Songs of the
Russian People</hi>, p. 117.</note> In Albania
Miss Durham sketched an old man who boasted of being a
hundred and ten years old. When every one recognised
the likeness, a look of great anxiety came over the patriarch's
face, and most earnestly he besought the artist never to
destroy the sketch, for he was certain that the moment the
sketch was torn he would drop down dead.<note place='foot'>Miss M. E. Durham, <hi rend='italic'>High Albania</hi>
(London, 1909), p. 107.</note> An artist in
England once vainly attempted to sketch a gypsy girl. <q>I
won't have her drawed out,</q> said the girl's aunt. <q>I told her
I'd make her scrawl the earth before me, if ever she let herself
be drawed out again.</q> <q>Why, what harm can there be?</q> <q>I
know there's a fiz (a charm) in it. There was my youngest,
that the gorja drawed out on Newmarket Heath, she never
held her head up after, but wasted away, and died, and she's
buried in March churchyard.</q><note place='foot'>F. H. Groome, <hi rend='italic'>In Gipsy Tents</hi>
(Edinburgh, 1880), pp. 337 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> There are persons in the
West of Scotland <q>who refuse to have their likenesses taken
lest it prove unlucky; and give as instances the cases of
several of their friends who never had a day's health after
being photographed.</q><note place='foot'>James Napier, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore, or
Superstitious Beliefs in the West of
Scotland</hi>, p. 142. For more examples
of the same sort, see R. Andree,
<hi rend='italic'>Ethnographische Parallelen und Vergleiche</hi>,
Neue Folge (Leipsic, 1889),
pp. 18 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. Tabooed Acts.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. Taboos on Intercourse with Strangers.'/>
<head>§ 1. Taboos on Intercourse with Strangers.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Primitive
conceptions
of the
soul helped
to mould
early kingships
by
dictating
rules to be
observed
by the king
for his
soul's
salvation.</note>
So much for the primitive conceptions of the soul and the
dangers to which it is exposed. These conceptions are not
limited to one people or country; with variations of detail
they are found all over the world, and survive, as we have
seen, in modern Europe. Beliefs so deep-seated and so
widespread must necessarily have contributed to shape the
mould in which the early kingship was cast. For if every
person was at such pains to save his own soul from the perils
which threatened it on so many sides, how much more
carefully must <emph>he</emph> have been guarded upon whose life hung
the welfare and even the existence of the whole people, and
whom therefore it was the common interest of all to preserve?
Therefore we should expect to find the king's life protected
by a system of precautions or safeguards still more numerous
and minute than those which in primitive society every man
adopts for the safety of his own soul. Now in point of fact
the life of the early kings is regulated, as we have seen and
shall see more fully presently, by a very exact code of rules.
May we not then conjecture that these rules are in fact the
very safeguards which we should expect to find adopted for
the protection of the king's life? An examination of the
rules themselves confirms this conjecture. For from this it
appears that some of the rules observed by the kings are
identical with those observed by private persons out of
regard for the safety of their souls; and even of those which
seem peculiar to the king, many, if not all, are most readily
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
explained on the hypothesis that they are nothing but safeguards
or lifeguards of the king. I will now enumerate
some of these royal rules or taboos, offering on each of them
such comments and explanations as may serve to set the
original intention of the rule in its proper light.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
general
effect of
these rules
is to isolate
the king,
especially
from
strangers.
The
savage
fears the
magic arts
of strangers
and hence
guards
himself
against
them. Various
modes of
disenchanting
strangers.</note>
As the object of the royal taboos is to isolate the king
from all sources of danger, their general effect is to compel
him to live in a state of seclusion, more or less complete,
according to the number and stringency of the rules he
observes. Now of all sources of danger none are more
dreaded by the savage than magic and witchcraft, and he
suspects all strangers of practising these black arts. To
guard against the baneful influence exerted voluntarily or
involuntarily by strangers is therefore an elementary dictate
of savage prudence. Hence before strangers are allowed
to enter a district, or at least before they are permitted
to mingle freely with the inhabitants, certain ceremonies
are often performed by the natives of the country for
the purpose of disarming the strangers of their magical
powers, of counteracting the baneful influence which is
believed to emanate from them, or of disinfecting, so to
speak, the tainted atmosphere by which they are supposed
to be surrounded. Thus, when the ambassadors sent by
Justin II., Emperor of the East, to conclude a peace with
the Turks had reached their destination, they were received
by shamans, who subjected them to a ceremonial purification
for the purpose of exorcising all harmful influence. Having
deposited the goods brought by the ambassadors in an open
place, these wizards carried burning branches of incense
round them, while they rang a bell and beat on a tambourine,
snorting and falling into a state of frenzy in their efforts to
dispel the powers of evil. Afterwards they purified the
ambassadors themselves by leading them through the flames.<note place='foot'>Menander Protector, in <hi rend='italic'>Fragmenta
historicorum Graecorum</hi>, ed. C. Müller,
iv. 227. Compare Gibbon, <hi rend='italic'>Decline and
Fall of the Roman Empire</hi>, ch. xlii.
vol. vii. pp. 294 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (Edinburgh,
1811).</note>
In the island of Nanumea (South Pacific) strangers from
ships or from other islands were not allowed to communicate
with the people until they all, or a few as representatives of
the rest, had been taken to each of the four temples in the
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
island, and prayers offered that the god would avert any
disease or treachery which these strangers might have
brought with them. Meat offerings were also laid upon the
altars, accompanied by songs and dances in honour of the
god. While these ceremonies were going on, all the people
except the priests and their attendants kept out of sight.<note place='foot'>G. Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi>, pp. 291 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
On returning from an attempted ascent of the great African
mountain Kilimanjaro, which is believed by the neighbouring
tribes to be tenanted by dangerous demons, Mr. New and
his party, as soon as they reached the border of the inhabited
country, were disenchanted by the inhabitants, being
sprinkled with <q>a professionally prepared liquor, supposed
to possess the potency of neutralising evil influences, and
removing the spell of wicked spirits.</q><note place='foot'>Charles New, <hi rend='italic'>Life, Wanderings,
and Labours in Eastern Africa</hi> (London,
1873), p. 432. Compare <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>
pp. 400, 402. For the demons on
Mt. Kilimanjaro, see also J. L. Krapf,
<hi rend='italic'>Travels, Researches, and Missionary
Labours in Eastern Africa</hi> (London,
1860), p. 192.</note> In the interior of
Yoruba (West Africa) the sentinels at the gates of towns
often oblige European travellers to wait till nightfall before
they admit them, fearing that if the strangers were admitted
by day the devil would enter behind them.<note place='foot'>Pierre Bouche, <hi rend='italic'>La Côte des Esclaves
et le Dahomey</hi> (Paris, 1885), p.
133.</note> The whole
Mahafaly country in Madagascar used to be tabooed to
strangers of the white race, the natives imagining that the
intrusion of a white man would immediately cause the death
of their king. The traveller Bastard had the greatest
difficulty in overcoming the reluctance of the natives to allow
him to enter their land and especially to visit their holy city.<note place='foot'>A. van Gennep, <hi rend='italic'>Tabou et totémisme
à Madagascar</hi> (Paris, 1904), p. 42.</note>
Amongst the Ot Danoms of Borneo it is the custom
that strangers entering the territory should pay to the
natives a certain sum, which is spent in the sacrifice
of buffaloes or pigs to the spirits of the land and water,
in order to reconcile them to the presence of the strangers,
and to induce them not to withdraw their favour from
the people of the country, but to bless the rice-harvest,
and so forth.<note place='foot'>C. A. L. M. Schwaner, <hi rend='italic'>Borneo</hi>
(Amsterdam, 1853-54), ii. 77.</note> The men of a certain district in Borneo,
fearing to look upon a European traveller lest he should
make them ill, warned their wives and children not
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
to go near him. Those who could not restrain their
curiosity killed fowls to appease the evil spirits and smeared
themselves with the blood.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> ii. 167.</note> <q>More dreaded,</q> says a
traveller in central Borneo, <q>than the evil spirits of the
neighbourhood are the evil spirits from a distance which
accompany travellers. When a company from the middle
Mahakam river visited me among the Blu-u Kayans in the
year 1897, no woman shewed herself outside her house without
a burning bundle of <foreign rend='italic'>plehiding</foreign> bark, the stinking smoke of
which drives away evil spirits.</q><note place='foot'>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>Quer durch
Borneo</hi>, ii. 102.</note> In Laos, before a stranger
can be accorded hospitality, the master of the house must offer
sacrifice to the ancestral spirits; otherwise the spirits would
be offended and would send disease on the inmates.<note place='foot'>E. Aymonier, <hi rend='italic'>Notes sur le Laos</hi>
(Saigon, 1885), p. 196.</note> When
Madame Pfeiffer arrived at the village of Hali-Bonar, among
the Battas of Sumatra, a buffalo was killed and the liver
offered to her. Then a ceremony was performed to propitiate
the evil spirits. Two young men danced, and one of
them in dancing sprinkled water from a buffalo's horn on
the visitor and the spectators.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</hi>
(Paris), IVme Série, vi. (1853) pp.
134 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the Mentawei Islands,
when a stranger enters a house where there are children, the
father or other member of the family takes the ornament
which the children wear in their hair and hands it to the
stranger, who holds it in his hands for a while and then
gives it back to him. This is thought to protect the children
from the evil effect which the sight of a stranger might have
upon them.<note place='foot'>H. von Rosenberg, <hi rend='italic'>Der malayische
Archipel</hi> (Leipsic, 1878), p. 198.</note> When a Dutch steamship was approaching
their villages, the people of Biak, an island off the north
coast of New Guinea, shook and knocked their idols about
in order to ward off ill-luck.<note place='foot'>D. W. Horst, <q>Rapport van eene
reis naar de Noordkust van Nieuw
Guinea,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>, xxxii.
(1889) p. 229.</note> At Shepherd's Isle Captain
Moresby had to be disenchanted before he was allowed to
land his boat's crew. When he leaped ashore, a devil-man
seized his right hand and waved a bunch of palm leaves
over the captain's head. Then <q>he placed the leaves in my
left hand, putting a small green twig into his mouth, still
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
holding me fast, and then, as if with great effort, drew the
twig from his mouth&mdash;this was extracting the evil spirit&mdash;after
which he blew violently, as if to speed it away. I now
held a twig between my teeth, and he went through the
same process.</q> Then the two raced round a couple of sticks
fixed in the ground and bent to an angle at the top, which
had leaves tied to it. After some more ceremonies the
devil-man concluded by leaping to the level of Captain
Moresby's shoulders (his hands resting on the captain's
shoulders) several times, <q>as if to show that he had
conquered the devil, and was now trampling him into
the earth.</q><note place='foot'>Capt. John Moresby, <hi rend='italic'>Discoveries
and Surveys in New Guinea</hi> (London,
1876), pp. 102 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> North American Indians <q>have an idea that
strangers, particularly white strangers, are ofttimes accompanied
by evil spirits. Of these they have great dread, as
creating and delighting in mischief. One of the duties of
the medicine chief is to exorcise these spirits. I have sometimes
ridden into or through a camp where I was unknown
or unexpected, to be confronted by a tall, half-naked savage,
standing in the middle of the circle of lodges, and yelling in
a sing-song, nasal tone, a string of unintelligible words.</q><note place='foot'>R. I. Dodge, <hi rend='italic'>Our Wild Indians</hi>
(Hartford, Conn., 1886), p. 119.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Disenchantment
effected by
means of
stinging
ants and
pungent
spices. Disenchantment
effected by
cuts with
knives.</note>
When Crevaux was travelling in South America he
entered a village of the Apalai Indians. A few moments
after his arrival some of the Indians brought him a number
of large black ants, of a species whose bite is painful,
fastened on palm leaves. Then all the people of the village,
without distinction of age or sex, presented themselves to
him, and he had to sting them all with the ants on their
faces, thighs, and other parts of their bodies. Sometimes
when he applied the ants too tenderly they called out
<q>More! more!</q> and were not satisfied till their skin was
thickly studded with tiny swellings like what might have
been produced by whipping them with nettles.<note place='foot'>J. Crevaux, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages dans
l'Amérique du Sud</hi> (Paris, 1883), p.
300.</note> The object
of this ceremony is made plain by the custom observed in
Amboyna and Uliase of sprinkling sick people with pungent
spices, such as ginger and cloves, chewed fine, in order by
the prickling sensation to drive away the demon of disease
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
which may be clinging to their persons.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik- en
kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en
Papua</hi>, p. 78.</note> In Java a popular
cure for gout or rheumatism is to rub Spanish pepper into
the nails of the fingers and toes of the sufferer; the pungency
of the pepper is supposed to be too much for the gout
or rheumatism, who accordingly departs in haste.<note place='foot'>J. Kreemer, <q>Hoe de Javaan zijne
zieken verzorgt,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van
wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xxxvi. (1892) p. 13. Mr. E.
W. Lewis, of Woodthorpe, Atkins
Rood, Clapham Park, London, S.W.,
writes to me (July 2, 1902) that his
grandmother, a native of Cheshire,
used to make bees sting her as a cure for
local rheumatism; she said the remedy
was infallible and had been handed
down to her from her mother.</note> So on
the Slave Coast of Africa the mother of a sick child sometimes
believes that an evil spirit has taken possession of the
child's body, and in order to drive him out, she makes small
cuts in the body of the little sufferer and inserts green
peppers or spices in the wounds, believing that she will
thereby hurt the evil spirit and force him to be gone. The
poor child naturally screams with pain, but the mother
hardens her heart in the belief that the demon is suffering
equally.<note place='foot'>Father Baudin, <q>Le Fétichisme,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Missions Catholiques</hi>, xvi. (1884) p.
249; A. B. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>The Yoruba-speaking
Peoples of the Slave Coast</hi> (London,
1894), pp. 113 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Hawaii a patient is sometimes pricked with
bamboo needles for the sake of hurting and expelling a refractory
demon who is lurking in the sufferer's body and
making him ill.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Allerlei aus Volks-
und Menschenkunde</hi> (Berlin, 1888), i.
116.</note> Dyak sorceresses in south-eastern Borneo
will sometimes slash the body of a sick man with sharp
knives in order, it is said, to allow the demon of disease
to escape through the cuts;<note place='foot'>J. B. de Callone, <q>Iets over de
geneeswijze en ziekten der Daijakers
ter Zuid Oostkust van Borneo,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Neêrlands Indie</hi>,
1840, dl. i. p. 418.</note> but perhaps the notion
rather is to make the present quarters of the spirit too
hot for him. With a similar intention some of the natives
of Borneo and Celebes sprinkle rice upon the head or body
of a person supposed to be infested by dangerous spirits; a
fowl is then brought, which, by picking up the rice from the
person's head or body, removes along with it the spirit or
ghost which is clinging like a burr to his skin. This is done,
for example, to persons who have attended a funeral, and
who may therefore be supposed to be infested by the ghost
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
of the deceased.<note place='foot'>M. T. H. Perelaer, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographische
Beschrijving der Dajaks</hi>,
pp. 44, 54, 252; B. F. Matthes,
<hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes</hi>
(The Hague, 1875), p. 49.</note> Similarly Basutos, who have carried a
corpse to the grave, have their hands scratched with a knife
from the tip of the thumb to the tip of the forefinger, and
magic stuff is rubbed into the wound,<note place='foot'>H. Grützner, <q>Über die Gebräuche
der Basutho,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen
der Berliner Gesellschaft für
Anthropologie, Ethnologie, und Urgeschichte</hi>,
1877, pp. 84 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> for the purpose, no
doubt, of removing the ghost which may be adhering to their
skin. Among the Barotse of south-eastern Africa a few
days after a funeral the sorcerer makes an incision in the
forehead of each surviving member of the family and fills it
with medicine, <q>in order to ward off contagion and the effect
of the sorcery which caused the death.</q><note place='foot'>L. Decle, <hi rend='italic'>Three Years in Savage
Africa</hi> (London, 1898), p. 81.</note> When elephant-hunters
in East Africa have killed an elephant they get
upon its carcase, make little cuts in their toes, and rub gunpowder
into the cuts. This is done with the double
intention of counteracting any evil influence that may
emanate from the dead elephant, and of acquiring thereby
the fleetness of foot possessed by the animal in its life.<note place='foot'>P. Reichard, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsch-Ostafrika</hi>
(Leipsic, 1892), p. 431.</note>
The people of Nias carefully scrub and scour the weapons
and clothes which they buy, in order to efface all connexion
between the things and the persons from whom they bought
them.<note place='foot'>Nieuwenhuisen en Rosenberg,
<q>Verslag omtrent het eiland Nias,</q> in
<hi rend='italic'>Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch
Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen</hi>,
xxx. (Batavia, 1863) p.
26.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremonies
observed
at the
reception
of strangers
may sometimes
be
intended to
counteract
their
enchantments.</note>
It is probable that the same dread of strangers, rather
than any desire to do them honour, is the motive of certain
ceremonies which are sometimes observed at their reception,
but of which the intention is not directly stated. In the
Ongtong Java Islands, which are inhabited by Polynesians,
and lie a little to the north of the Solomon Islands, the
priests or sorcerers seem to wield great influence. Their main
business is to summon or exorcise spirits for the purpose
of averting or dispelling sickness, and of procuring favourable
winds, a good catch of fish, and so on. When strangers
land on the islands, they are first of all received by the
sorcerers, sprinkled with water, anointed with oil, and girt
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
with dried pandanus leaves. At the same time sand and
water are freely thrown about in all directions, and the newcomer
and his boat are wiped with green leaves. After this
ceremony the strangers are introduced by the sorcerers to
the chief.<note place='foot'>R. Parkinson, <q>Zur Ethnographie
der Ontong Java- und Tasman-Inseln,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Internationales Archiv für
Ethnographie</hi>, x. (1897) p. 112.</note> In Afghanistan and in some parts of Persia
the traveller, before he enters a village, is frequently received
with a sacrifice of animal life or food, or of fire and incense.
The Afghan Boundary Mission, in passing by villages
in Afghanistan, was often met with fire and incense.<note place='foot'>T. S. Weir, <q>Note on Sacrifices
in India as a Means of averting Epidemics,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Society of Bombay</hi>, i. 35.</note>
Sometimes a tray of lighted embers is thrown under the
hoofs of the traveller's horse, with the words, <q>You are
welcome.</q><note place='foot'>E. O'Donovan, <hi rend='italic'>The Merv Oasis</hi>
(London, 1882), ii. 58.</note> On entering a village in central Africa Emin
Pasha was received with the sacrifice of two goats; their
blood was sprinkled on the path and the chief stepped over
the blood to greet Emin.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Emin Pasha in Central Africa,
being a Collection of his Letters and
Journals</hi> (London, 1888), p. 107.</note> Before strangers entered the
country or city of Benin, custom compelled them to have
their feet washed; sometimes the ceremony was performed
in a sacred place.<note place='foot'>H. Ling Roth, <hi rend='italic'>Great Benin</hi>
(Halifax, England, 1903), p. 123.</note> Amongst the Esquimaux of Cumberland
Inlet, when a stranger arrives at an encampment, the
sorcerer goes out to meet him. The stranger folds his
arms and inclines his head to one side, so as to expose
his cheek, upon which the magician deals a terrible blow,
sometimes felling him to the ground. Next the sorcerer in
his turn presents his cheek to the smiter and receives a buffet
from the stranger. Then they kiss each other, the ceremony
is over, and the stranger is hospitably received by all.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the Second Arctic
Expedition made by Charles F. Hall</hi>,
edited by Prof. J. G. Nourse, U.S.N.
(Washington, 1879), p. 269, note.
Compare Fr. Boas, <q>The Central
Eskimo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Sixth Annual Report of the
Bureau of Ethnology</hi> (Washington,
1888), p. 609.</note>
Sometimes the dread of strangers and their magic is too
great to allow of their reception on any terms. Thus when
Speke arrived at a certain village, the natives shut their
doors against him, <q>because they had never before seen a
white man nor the tin boxes that the men were carrying:
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
<q>Who knows,</q> they said, <q>but that these very boxes are the
plundering Watuta transformed and come to kill us? You
cannot be admitted.</q> No persuasion could avail with them,
and the party had to proceed to the next village.</q><note place='foot'>J. A. Grant, <hi rend='italic'>A Walk across Africa</hi>,
pp. 104 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremonies
observed
at entering
a strange
land to
disenchant
it. Ceremonies
at entering
a strange
land to
disenchant
it or to
propitiate
the local
spirits.</note>
The fear thus entertained of alien visitors is often mutual.
Entering a strange land the savage feels that he is treading
enchanted ground, and he takes steps to guard against the
demons that haunt it and the magical arts of its inhabitants.
Thus on going to a strange land the Maoris performed
certain ceremonies to make it <foreign rend='italic'>noa</foreign> (common), lest it might
have been previously <foreign rend='italic'>tapu</foreign> (sacred).<note place='foot'>E. Shortland, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions and
Superstitions of the New Zealanders</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(London, 1856), p. 103.</note> When Baron Miklucho-Maclay
was approaching a village on the Maclay Coast of
New Guinea, one of the natives who accompanied him broke
a branch from a tree and going aside whispered to it for a
while; then stepping up to each member of the party, one
after another, he spat something upon his back and gave
him some blows with the branch. Lastly, he went into the
forest and buried the branch under withered leaves in the
thickest part of the jungle. This ceremony was believed to
protect the party against all treachery and danger in the
village they were approaching.<note place='foot'>N. von Miklucho-Maclay, <q>Ethnologische
Bemerkungen über die
Papuas der Maclay-Kuste in Neu-Guinea,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Natuurkundig Tijdschrift
voor Nederlandsch Indie</hi>, xxxvi. 317
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The idea probably was
that the malignant influences were drawn off from the
persons into the branch and buried with it in the depths of
the forest. Before Stuhlmann and his companions entered
the territory of the Wanyamwesi in central Africa, one of
his men killed a white cock and buried it in a pot just at
the boundary.<note place='foot'>Fr. Stuhlmann, <hi rend='italic'>Mit Emin Pascha
ins Herz von Afrika</hi> (Berlin, 1894), p.
94.</note> In Australia, when a strange tribe has been
invited into a district and is approaching the encampment
of the tribe which owns the land, <q>the strangers carry
lighted bark or burning sticks in their hands, for the purpose,
they say, of clearing and purifying the air.</q><note place='foot'>R. Brough Smyth, <hi rend='italic'>Aborigines of
Victoria</hi>, i. 134.</note> On the coast
of Victoria there is a tract of country between the La Trobe
River and the Yarra River, which some of the aborigines
called the Bad Country. It was supposed to act injuriously
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
on strangers. Hence when a man of another clan entered
it he needed some one of the natives to look after him;
and if his guardian went away from the camp, he deputed
another to take his place. During his first visit, before he
became as it were acclimatised, the visitor did nothing for
himself as to food, drinking-water, or lodging. He was
painted with a band of white pipe-clay across the face below
the eyes, and had to learn the Nulit language before going
further. He slept on a thick layer of leaves so that he
should not touch the ground; and he was fed with flesh-meat
from the point of a burnt stick, which he removed with
his teeth, not with his lips. His drinking-water was drawn
from a small hole in the ground by his entertainers, and they
made it muddy by stirring it with a stick. He might only
take three mouthfuls at a time, each of which he had to let
slowly trickle down his throat. If he did otherwise, his
throat would close up.<note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South-East Australia</hi>, p. 403.</note> The Kayans and Kenyahs of
Borneo think it well to conciliate the spirit of the land
when they enter a strange country. <q>The old men, indeed,
trusting to the protection afforded by omens, are in little
need of further aid, but when young boys are brought into a
new river of importance, the hospitality of the local demons
is invoked. The Kayans make an offering of fowls' eggs,
which must not be bought on the spot, but are carried from
the house, sometimes for distances so long that the devotion
of the travellers is more apparent than their presents to the
spirits of the land. Each boy takes an egg and puts it in a
bamboo split at the end into four, while one of the older
men calls upon the hills, rocks, trees, and streams to hear
him and to witness the offering. Careful to disguise the
true nature of the gift, he speaks of it as <foreign rend='italic'>ovē</foreign>, a yam, using
a form of words fixed by usage. <q>Omen bird,</q> he shouts
into the air, <q>we have brought you these boys. It is on
their account only that we have prepared this feast. Harm
them not; make things go pleasantly; and they give you
the usual offering of a yam. I give this to the country.</q>
The little ceremony is performed behind the hut where the
night is spent, and the boys wait about for the charm to
take effect. The custom of the Kenyahs shows the same
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
feeling for the unknown and unseen spirits that are supposed
to abound. A fowl's feathers, one for each boy, are held by
an old man, while the youngsters touch his arm. The
invocation is quite a powerful example of native rhetoric:
<q>Smooth away trouble, ye mystic mountains, hills, valleys,
soil, rocks, trees. Shield the lives of the children who have
come hither.</q></q><note place='foot'>Ch. Hose, <hi rend='italic'>Notes on the Natives of
British Borneo</hi> (in manuscript).</note> When the Toradjas of central Celebes are
on a head-hunting expedition and have entered the enemy's
country, they may not eat any fruits which the foe has
planted nor any animal which he has reared until they have
first committed an act of hostility, as by burning a house or
killing a man. They think that if they broke this rule they
would receive something of the soul or spiritual essence of
the enemy into themselves, which would destroy the mystic
virtue of their talismans.<note place='foot'>A. C. Kruijt, <q>Het koppensnellen
der Toradja's van Midden-Celebes,
en zijne beteekenis,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verslagen en
Mededeelingen der Konikl. Akademie
van Wetenschappen</hi>, Afdeeling Letterkunde,
iv. Reeks, iii. (1899) p.
204.</note> It is said that just before Greek
armies advanced to the shock of battle, a man bearing a
lighted torch stepped out from either side and threw his
torch into the space between the hosts. Then they retired
unmolested, for they were thought to be sacred to Ares and
inviolable.<note place='foot'>Scholiast on Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Phoenissae</hi>,
1377, ed. E. Schwartz.</note> Now some peoples fancy that when they
advance to battle the spirits of their fathers hover in the
van.<note place='foot'>Conon, <hi rend='italic'>Narrationes</hi>, 18; Pausanias,
iii. 19. 12; Francis Fleming, <hi rend='italic'>Southern
Africa</hi> (London, 1856), p. 259;
Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>The Essential Kafir</hi>, p.
307.</note> Hence fire thrown out in front of the line of battle
may be meant to disperse these shadowy combatants,
leaving the issue of the fight to be determined by more
substantial weapons than ghosts can wield. Similarly the
fire which is sometimes borne at the head of an army<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, vol. ii. pp. 263 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> is
perhaps in some cases intended to dissipate the evil
influences, whether magical or spiritual, with which the air
of the enemy's country may be conceived to teem.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Purificatory
ceremonies
observed
on the
return
from a
journey.</note>
Again, it is thought that a man who has been on a
journey may have contracted some magic evil from the
strangers with whom he has been brought into contact.
Hence, on returning home, before he is readmitted to the
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
society of his tribe and friends, he has to undergo certain
purificatory ceremonies. Thus the Bechuanas <q>cleanse or
purify themselves after journeys by shaving their heads, etc.,
lest they should have contracted from strangers some evil
by witchcraft or sorcery.</q><note place='foot'>John Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in South
Africa, being a Narrative of a Second
Journey in the Interior of that Country</hi>
(London, 1822), ii. 205.</note> In some parts of western Africa
when a man returns home after a long absence, before he is
allowed to visit his wife, he must wash his person with a
particular fluid, and receive from the sorcerer a certain mark
on his forehead, in order to counteract any magic spell
which a stranger woman may have cast on him in his
absence, and which might be communicated through him to
the women of his village.<note place='foot'>Ladislaus Magyar, <hi rend='italic'>Reisen in Süd-Afrika</hi>
(Buda-Pesth and Leipsic, 1859),
p. 203.</note> Every year about one-third of
the men of the Wanyamwesi tribe make journeys to the east
coast of Africa either as porters or as traffickers. Before he
sets out, the husband smears his cheeks with a sort of meal-porridge,
and during his absence his wife may eat no flesh
and must keep for him the sediment of the porridge in the
pot. On their return from the coast the men sprinkle meal
every day on all the paths leading to the camp, for the
purpose, it is supposed, of keeping evil spirits off; and
when they reach their homes the men again smear porridge
on their faces, while the women who have stayed at home
strew ashes on their heads.<note place='foot'>Fr. Stuhlmann, <hi rend='italic'>Mit Emin Pascha
ins Herz von Afrika</hi> (Berlin, 1894), p.
89.</note> In Uganda, when a man
returns from a journey, his wife takes some of the bark
cloths from the bed of one of his children and lays them on
her husband's bed; and as he enters the house, he jumps
over one of his wives who has children by him, or over one
of his children. If he neglects to do this, one of his children
or one of his wives will die.<note place='foot'>J. Roscoe, <q>Further Notes on the
Manners and Customs of the Baganda,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxii. (1902) p. 62.</note> When Damaras return home
after a long absence, they are given a small portion of the
fat of particular animals, which is supposed to possess
certain virtues.<note place='foot'>C. J. Andersson, <hi rend='italic'>Lake Ngami</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(London, 1856), p. 223.</note> A story is told of a Navajo Indian
who, after long wanderings, returned to his own people.
When he came within sight of his house, his people
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
made him stop and told him not to approach nearer till
they had summoned a shaman. When the shaman was come
<q>ceremonies were performed over the returned wanderer,
and he was washed from head to foot, and dried with corn-meal;
for thus do the Navajo treat all who return to their
homes from captivity with another tribe, in order that all
alien substances and influences may be removed from them.
When he had been thus purified he entered the house, and
his people embraced him and wept over him.</q><note place='foot'>Washington Matthews, <q>The
Mountain Chant: a Navajo Ceremony,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Fifth Annual Report of the Bureau of
Ethnology</hi> (Washington, 1887), p. 410.</note> Two
Hindoo ambassadors, who had been sent to England by a
native prince and had returned to India, were considered to
have so polluted themselves by contact with strangers that
nothing but being born again could restore them to purity.
<q>For the purpose of regeneration it is directed to make an
image of pure gold of the female power of nature, in the
shape either of a woman or of a cow. In this statue the
person to be regenerated is enclosed, and dragged through
the usual channel. As a statue of pure gold and of proper
dimensions would be too expensive, it is sufficient to make
an image of the sacred <foreign rend='italic'>Yoni</foreign>, through which the person to be
regenerated is to pass.</q> Such an image of pure gold was
made at the prince's command, and his ambassadors were
born again by being dragged through it.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Asiatick Researches</hi>, vi. 535 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> ed.
4to (p. 537 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> ed. 8vo).</note> In some of the
Moluccas, when a brother or young blood-relation returns
from a long journey, a young girl awaits him at the door with
a <foreign rend='italic'>caladi</foreign> leaf in her hand and water in the leaf. She throws
the water over his face and bids him welcome.<note place='foot'>François Valentyn, <hi rend='italic'>Oud en nieuw
Oost-Indiën</hi>, iii. 16.</note> Among the
Kayans of Borneo, men who have been absent on a long
journey are secluded for four days in a small hut made
specially for the purpose before they are allowed to
enter their own house.<note place='foot'>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>In Centraal
Borneo</hi>, i. 165.</note> The natives of Savage Island
(South Pacific) invariably killed, not only all strangers in
distress who were drifted to their shores, but also any
of their own people who had gone away in a ship and
returned home. This was done out of dread of disease.
Long after they began to venture out to ships they
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
would not immediately use the things they obtained from
them, but hung them up in quarantine for weeks in the
bush.<note place='foot'>G. Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi>, pp. 305 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Special
precautions
taken to
guard the
king
against the
magic of
strangers.</note>
When precautions like these are taken on behalf
of the people in general against the malignant influence
supposed to be exercised by strangers, it is no wonder
that special measures are adopted to protect the king
from the same insidious danger. In the middle ages the
envoys who visited a Tartar Khan were obliged to pass
between two fires before they were admitted to his presence,
and the gifts they brought were also carried between the
fires. The reason assigned for the custom was that the fire
purged away any magic influence which the strangers might
mean to exercise over the Khan.<note place='foot'>De Plano Carpini, <hi rend='italic'>Historia Mongolorum
quos nos Tartaros appellamus</hi>,
ed. D'Avezac (Paris, 1838), cap. iii. § iii.
p. 627, cap. ult. § i. x. p. 744, and
Appendix, p. 775; <q>Travels of William
de Rubriquis into Tartary and China,</q>
in Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, vii.
82 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When subject chiefs come
with their retinues to visit Kalamba (the most powerful
chief of the Bashilange in the Congo Basin) for the first
time or after being rebellious, they have to bathe, men and
women together, in two brooks on two successive days,
passing the nights under the open sky in the market-place.
After the second bath they proceed, entirely naked, to the
house of Kalamba, who makes a long white mark on the
breast and forehead of each of them. Then they return to
the market-place and dress, after which they undergo the
pepper ordeal. Pepper is dropped into the eyes of each of
them, and while this is being done the sufferer has to make
a confession of all his sins, to answer all questions that may
be put to him, and to take certain vows. This ends the
ceremony, and the strangers are now free to take up their
quarters in the town for as long as they choose to remain.<note place='foot'>Paul Pogge, <q>Bericht über die
Station Mukenge,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen der
Afrikanischen Gesellschaft in Deutschland</hi>,
iv. (1883-1885) pp. 182 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Before strangers were admitted to the presence of Lobengula,
king of the Matebeles, they had to be treated with
a sticky green medicine, which was profusely sprinkled
over them by means of a cow's tail.<note place='foot'>Coillard, <q>Voyage au pays des
Banyais et au Zambèse,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de la
Société de Géographie</hi> (Paris), VIme
Série, xx. (1880) p. 393.</note> At Kilema, in
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
eastern Africa, when a stranger arrives, a medicine is
made out of a certain plant or a tree fetched from a
distance, mixed with the blood of a sheep or goat. With
this mixture the stranger is besmeared or besprinkled
before he is admitted to the presence of the king.<note place='foot'>J. L. Krapf, <hi rend='italic'>Travels, Researches,
and Missionary Labours during an
Eighteen Years' Residence in Eastern
Africa</hi> (London, 1860), pp. 252
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The
king of Monomotapa, in South-East Africa, might not wear
any foreign stuffs for fear of their being poisoned.<note place='foot'>O. Dapper, <hi rend='italic'>Description de l'Afrique</hi>
(Amsterdam, 1686), p. 391.</note> The
king of Cacongo, in West Africa, might not possess or even
touch European goods, except metals, arms, and articles
made of wood and ivory. Persons wearing foreign stuffs
were very careful to keep at a distance from his person, lest
they should touch him.<note place='foot'>Proyart, <q>History of Loango,
Kakongo,</q> etc., in Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages
and Travels</hi>, xvi. 583; Dapper, <hi rend='italic'>op.
cit.</hi> p. 340; J. Ogilby, <hi rend='italic'>Africa</hi> (London,
1670), p. 521. Compare A. Bastian,
<hi rend='italic'>Die deutsche Expedition an der Loango-Küste</hi>,
i. 288.</note> The king of Loango might not
look upon the house of a white man.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 268 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> We have already
seen how the native king of Fernando Po dwells secluded
from all contact with the whites in the depths of an extinct
volcano, shunning the very sight of a pale face, which, in the
belief of his subjects, would be instantly fatal to him.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In a
wild mountainous district of Java, to the south of Bantam,
there exists a small aboriginal race who have been described
as a living antiquity. These are the Baduwis, who about
the year 1443 fled from Bantam to escape conversion to
Islam, and in their mountain fastnesses, holding aloof from
their neighbours, still cleave to the quaint and primitive ways
of their heathen forefathers. Their villages are perched in
spots which deep ravines, lofty precipices, raging torrents,
and impenetrable forests combine to render almost inaccessible.
Their hereditary ruler bears the title of Girang-Pu-un
and unites in his hands the temporal and spiritual power.
He must never quit the capital, and none even of his subjects
who live outside the town are ever allowed to see him.
Were an alien to set foot in his dwelling, the place would
be desecrated and abandoned. In former times the representatives
of the Dutch Government and the Regent of Java
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
once paid a visit to the capital of the Baduwis. That very
night all the people fled the place and never returned.<note place='foot'>L. von Ende, <q>Die Baduwis auf
Java,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen der anthropologischen
Gesellschaft in Wien</hi>, xix.
(1889) pp. 7-10. As to the Baduwis
(Badoejs) see also G. A. Wilken,
<hi rend='italic'>Handleiding voor de vergelijkende Volkenkunde
van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>
(Leyden, 1893), pp. 640-643.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. Taboos on Eating and Drinking.'/>
<head>§ 2. Taboos on Eating and Drinking.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Spiritual
dangers of
eating and
drinking
and precautions
taken
against
them.</note>
In the opinion of savages the acts of eating and drinking
are attended with special danger; for at these times the soul
may escape from the mouth, or be extracted by the magic
arts of an enemy present. Among the Ewe-speaking peoples
of the Slave Coast <q>the common belief seems to be that the
indwelling spirit leaves the body and returns to it through
the mouth; hence, should it have gone out, it behoves a
man to be careful about opening his mouth, lest a homeless
spirit should take advantage of the opportunity and enter
his body. This, it appears, is considered most likely to take
place while the man is eating.</q><note place='foot'>A. B. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>The Ewe-speaking
Peoples of the Slave Coast</hi>, p. 107.</note> Precautions are therefore
taken to guard against these dangers. Thus of the Battas
of Sumatra it is said that <q>since the soul can leave the body,
they always take care to prevent their soul from straying on
occasions when they have most need of it. But it is only
possible to prevent the soul from straying when one is in
the house. At feasts one may find the whole house shut
up, in order that the soul (<foreign rend='italic'>tondi</foreign>) may stay and enjoy the
good things set before it.</q><note place='foot'>J. B. Neumann, <q>Het Pane- en
Bila- Stroomgebied op het eiland
Sumatra,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch
Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</hi>,
Tweede Serie, dl. iii. (1886) Afdeeling,
meer uitgebreide artikelen, No. 2,
p. 300.</note> The Zafimanelo in Madagascar
lock their doors when they eat, and hardly any one ever
sees them eating.<note place='foot'>J. Richardson, <q>Tanala Customs,
Superstitions and Beliefs,</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Antananarivo
Annual and Madagascar
Magazine, Reprint of the First Four
Numbers</hi> (Antananarivo, 1885), p. 219.</note> In Shoa, one of the southern provinces
of Abyssinia, the doors of the house are scrupulously barred
at meals to exclude the evil eye, and a fire is invariably
lighted, else devils would enter and there would be no
blessing on the meat.<note place='foot'>W. Cornwallis Harris, <hi rend='italic'>The Highlands
of Aethiopia</hi>, iii. 171 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Every time that an Abyssinian of
rank drinks, a servant holds a cloth before his master to
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
guard him from the evil eye.<note place='foot'>Th. Lefebvre, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage en Abyssinie</hi>,
i. p. lxxii.</note> The Warua will not allow
any one to see them eating and drinking, being doubly
particular that no person of the opposite sex shall see them
doing so. <q>I had to pay a man to let me see him drink;
I could not make a man let a woman see him drink.</q>
When offered a drink of <foreign rend='italic'>pombe</foreign> they often ask that a cloth
may be held up to hide them whilst drinking. Further,
every man and woman must cook for themselves; each
person must have his own fire.<note place='foot'>Lieut. V. L. Cameron, <hi rend='italic'>Across
Africa</hi> (London, 1877), ii. 71; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, in
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
vi. (1877) p. 173.</note> The Tuaregs of the
Sahara never eat or drink in presence of any one else.<note place='foot'>Ebn-el-Dyn el-Eghouâthy, <q>Relation
d'un voyage dans l'intérieur
de l'Afrique septentrionale,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin
de la Société de Géographie</hi> (Paris),
IIme Série, i. (1834) p. 290.</note>
The Thompson Indians of British Columbia thought that a
shaman could bewitch them most easily when they were
eating, drinking, or smoking; hence they avoided doing any
of these things in presence of an unknown shaman.<note place='foot'>J. Teit, <q>The Thompson Indians
of British Columbia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Memoir of the
American Museum of Natural History,
The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</hi>,
vol. i. part iv. (April 1900) p. 360.</note> In
Fiji persons who suspected others of plotting against them
avoided eating in their presence, or were careful to leave no
fragment of food behind.<note place='foot'>Th. Williams, <hi rend='italic'>Fiji and the Fijians</hi>.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
i. 249.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Seclusion
of kings at
their meals.</note>
If these are the ordinary precautions taken by common
people, the precautions taken by kings are extraordinary.
The king of Loango may not be seen eating or drinking by
man or beast under pain of death. A favourite dog having
broken into the room where the king was dining, the king
ordered it to be killed on the spot. Once the king's
own son, a boy of twelve years old, inadvertently saw the
king drink. Immediately the king ordered him to be finely
apparelled and feasted, after which he commanded him to
be cut in quarters, and carried about the city with a proclamation
that he had seen the king drink. <q>When the
king has a mind to drink, he has a cup of wine brought; he
that brings it has a bell in his hand, and as soon as he has
delivered the cup to the king, he turns his face from him and
rings the bell, on which all present fall down with their faces
to the ground, and continue so till the king has drank....
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
His eating is much in the same style, for which he has a
house on purpose, where his victuals are set upon a bensa
or table: which he goes to, and shuts the door: when he
has done, he knocks and comes out. So that none ever see
the king eat or drink. For it is believed that if any one
should, the king shall immediately die.</q> The remnants of
his food are buried, doubtless to prevent them from falling
into the hands of sorcerers, who by means of these fragments
might cast a fatal spell over the monarch.<note place='foot'><q>Adventures of Andrew Battel,</q>
in Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>,
xvi. 330; O. Dapper, <hi rend='italic'>Description de
l'Afrique</hi>, p. 330; A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die
deutsche Expedition an der Loango-Küste</hi>,
i. 262 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; R. F. Burton,
<hi rend='italic'>Abeokuta and the Cameroons Mountains</hi>,
i. 147.</note> The rules
observed by the neighbouring king of Cacongo were similar;
it was thought that the king would die if any of his subjects
were to see him drink.<note place='foot'>Proyart's <q>History of Loango,
Kakongo,</q> etc., in Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages
and Travels</hi>, xvi. 584.</note> It is a capital offence to see the
king of Dahomey at his meals. When he drinks in public,
as he does on extraordinary occasions, he hides himself
behind a curtain, or handkerchiefs are held up round his
head, and all the people throw themselves with their faces to
the earth.<note place='foot'>J. L. Wilson, <hi rend='italic'>Western Africa</hi>, p.
202; John Duncan, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in Western
Africa</hi>, i. 222. Compare W. W.
Reade, <hi rend='italic'>Savage Africa</hi>, p. 543.</note> Any one who saw the Muata Jamwo (a great
potentate in the Congo Basin) eating or drinking would
certainly be put to death.<note place='foot'>Paul Pogge, <hi rend='italic'>Im Reiche des Muata
Jamwo</hi> (Berlin, 1880), p. 231.</note> When the king (<foreign rend='italic'>Muata</foreign>) of
Cazembe raises his glass to his mouth to drink, all who are
present prostrate themselves and avert their faces in such a
manner as not to see him drinking.<note place='foot'>F. T. Valdez, <hi rend='italic'>Six Years of a
Traveller's Life in Western Africa</hi>
(London, 1861), ii. 256.</note> At Asaba, on the
Lower Niger, where the kings or chiefs number fully four
hundred, no one is allowed to prepare the royal dishes.
The chiefs act as their own cooks and eat in the strictest
privacy.<note place='foot'>A. F. Mockler-Ferryman, <hi rend='italic'>Up the
Niger</hi> (London, 1892), p. 38.</note> The king and royal family of Walo, on the
Senegal, never take their meals in public; it is expressly
forbidden to see them eating.<note place='foot'>Baron Roger, <q>Notice sur le
gouvernement, les mœurs et les superstitions
des Nègres du pays de Walo,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</hi>
(Paris), viii. (1827) p. 351.</note> Among the Monbutto of
central Africa the king invariably takes his meals in
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
private; no one may see the contents of his dish, and all
that he leaves is carefully thrown into a pit set apart for
that purpose. Everything that the king has handled is
held sacred and may not be touched.<note place='foot'>G. Schweinfurth, <hi rend='italic'>The Heart of
Africa</hi>, ii. 45 (third edition, London,
1878); G. Casati, <hi rend='italic'>Ten Years in
Equatoria</hi> (London and New York,
1891), i. 177. As to the various
customs observed by Monbutto chiefs
in drinking see G. Burrows, <hi rend='italic'>The Land
of the Pigmies</hi> (London, 1898), pp.
88, 91.</note> When the king of
Unyoro in central Africa went to drink milk in the dairy,
every man must leave the royal enclosure and all the
women had to cover their heads till the king returned. No
one might see him drink. One wife accompanied him to
the dairy and handed him the milk-pot, but she turned
away her face while he drained it.<note place='foot'>J. G. Frazer, <hi rend='italic'>Totemism and Exogamy</hi>,
ii. 526, from information
furnished by the Rev. John Roscoe.</note> The king of Susa,
a region to the south of Abyssinia, presides daily at the
feast in the long banqueting-hall, but is hidden from the
gaze of his subjects by a curtain.<note place='foot'>W. Cornwallis Harris, <hi rend='italic'>The Highlands
of Aethiopia</hi>, iii. 78.</note> Among the Ewe-speaking
peoples of the Slave Coast the person of the king is sacred,
and if he drinks in public every one must turn away the
head so as not to see him, while some of the women of the
court hold up a cloth before him as a screen. He never
eats in public, and the people pretend to believe that he
neither eats nor sleeps. It is criminal to say the contrary.<note place='foot'>A. B. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>The Ewe-speaking
Peoples of the Slave Coast</hi>, pp. 162 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
When the king of Tonga ate, all the people turned their
backs to him.<note place='foot'>Capt. James Cook, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages</hi>, v.
374 (ed. 1809).</note> In the palace of the Persian kings there
were two dining-rooms opposite each other; in one of them
the king dined, in the other his guests. He could see them
through a curtain on the door, but they could not see him.
Generally the king took his meals alone; but sometimes his
wife or some of his sons dined with him.<note place='foot'>Heraclides Cumanus, in Athenaeus,
iv. 26, p. 145 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b-d</hi>. On the other hand,
in Kafa no one, not even the king, may
eat except in the presence of a legal
witness. A slave is appointed to witness
the king's meals, and his office
is esteemed honourable. See F. G.
Massaja, in <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de la Société de
Géographie</hi> (Paris), Vme Série, i.
(1861) pp. 330 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Ph. Paulitschke,
<hi rend='italic'>Ethnographie Nordost-Afrikas: die
geistige Cultur der Danâkil, Galla und
Somâl</hi> (Berlin, 1896), pp. 248 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='3. Taboos on shewing the Face.'/>
<head>§ 3. Taboos on shewing the Face.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Faces
veiled to
avert evil
influences. Kings not
to be seen
by their
subjects.</note>
In some of the preceding cases the intention of eating
and drinking in strict seclusion may perhaps be to hinder
evil influences from entering the body rather than to prevent
the escape of the soul. This certainly is the motive
of some drinking customs observed by natives of the
Congo region. Thus we are told of these people that
<q>there is hardly a native who would dare to swallow a
liquid without first conjuring the spirits. One of them
rings a bell all the time he is drinking; another crouches
down and places his left hand on the earth; another veils
his head; another puts a stalk of grass or a leaf in his
hair, or marks his forehead with a line of clay. This fetish
custom assumes very varied forms. To explain them, the
black is satisfied to say that they are an energetic mode of
conjuring spirits.</q> In this part of the world a chief will
commonly ring a bell at each draught of beer which he
swallows, and at the same moment a lad stationed in front
of him brandishes a spear <q>to keep at bay the spirits which
might try to sneak into the old chief's body by the same
road as the <foreign rend='italic'>massanga</foreign> (beer).</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Notes analytiques sur les collections
ethnographiques du Musée du
Congo</hi>, I. <hi rend='italic'>Les Arts, Religion</hi> (Brussels,
1902-1906), p. 164.</note> The same motive of
warding off evil spirits probably explains the custom
observed by some African sultans of veiling their faces.
The Sultan of Darfur wraps up his face with a piece of white
muslin, which goes round his head several times, covering
his mouth and nose first, and then his forehead, so that only
his eyes are visible. The same custom of veiling the face
as a mark of sovereignty is said to be observed in other
parts of central Africa.<note place='foot'>Mohammed Ibn-Omar el Tounsy,
<hi rend='italic'>Voyage au Darfour</hi> (Paris, 1845), p.
203; <hi rend='italic'>Travels of an Arab Merchant</hi>
[Mohammed Ibn-Omar el Tounsy] <hi rend='italic'>in
Soudan</hi>, abridged from the French
(of Perron) by Bayle St. John (London,
1854), pp. 91 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Sultan of Wadai always
speaks from behind a curtain; no one sees his face except
his intimates and a few favoured persons.<note place='foot'>Mohammed Ibn-Omar el Tounsy,
<hi rend='italic'>Voyage au Ouadây</hi> (Paris, 1851), p.
375.</note> Similarly the
Sultan of Bornu never shewed himself to his people and
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
only spoke to them from behind a curtain.<note place='foot'>Ibn Batoutah, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages</hi>, ed. C.
Defrémery et B. R. Sanguinetti (Paris,
1853-1858), iv. 441.</note> The king of
Chonga, a town on the right bank of the Niger above Egga,
may not be seen by his subjects nor by strangers. At an
interview he sits in his palace concealed by a mat which
hangs like a curtain, and from behind it he converses with
his visitor.<note place='foot'>Le Commandant Mattei, <hi rend='italic'>Bas-Niger,
Bénoué, Dahomey</hi> (Paris, 1895),
pp. 90 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Muysca Indians of Colombia had such a
respect for their chiefs that they dared not lift their eyes on
them, but always turned their backs when they had to
address them. If a thief, after repeated punishments, proved
incorrigible, they took him to the chief, and one of the nobles,
turning the culprit round, said to him, <q>Since you think
yourself so great a lord that you have the right to break the
laws, you have the right to look at the chief.</q> From that
moment the criminal was regarded as infamous. Nobody
would have anything to do with him or even speak to him,
and he died an outcast.<note place='foot'>H. Ternaux-Compans, <hi rend='italic'>Essai sur
l'ancien Cundinamarca</hi>, p. 60.</note> Montezuma was revered by his
subjects as a god, and he set so much store on their
reverence that if on going out of the city he saw a man
lift up his eyes on him, he had the rash gazer put to death.
He generally lived in the retirement of his palace, seldom
shewing himself. On the days when he went to visit his
gardens, he was carried in a litter through a street which
was enclosed by walls; none but his bearers had the right
to pass along that street.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Manuscrit Ramirez, histoire de
l'origine des Indiens qui habitent la
Nouvelle Espagne selon leurs traditions</hi>,
publié par D. Charnay (Paris, 1903),
pp. 107 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> It was a law of the Medes that
their king should be seen by nobody.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, i. 99.</note> The king of Jebu,
on the Slave Coast of West Africa, is surrounded by a great
deal of mystery. Until lately his face might not be seen
even by his own subjects, and if circumstances compelled
him to communicate with them he did so through a screen
which concealed him from view. Now, though his face may
be seen, it is customary to hide his body; and at audiences
a cloth is held before him so as to conceal him from the
neck downwards, and it is raised so as to cover him altogether
whenever he coughs, sneezes, spits, or takes snuff. His face
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
is partially hidden by a conical cap with hanging strings of
beads.<note place='foot'>A. B. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>The Yoruba-speaking
Peoples of the Slave Coast</hi>, p. 170.</note> Amongst the Tuaregs of the Sahara all the men
(but not the women) keep the lower part of their face,
especially the mouth, veiled constantly; the veil is never
put off, not even in eating or sleeping.<note place='foot'>Ebn-el-Dyn el-Eghouathy, <q>Relation
d'un voyage,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de la
Société de Géographie</hi> (Paris), IIme
Série, i. (1834) p. 290; H. Duveyrier,
<hi rend='italic'>Exploration du Sahara: les Touareg
du Nord</hi>, pp. 391 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Reclus,
<hi rend='italic'>Nouvelle Géographie Universelle</hi>, xi.
838 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; James Richardson, <hi rend='italic'>Travels
in the Great Desert of Sahara</hi>, ii. 208.</note> Among the Arabs
men remarkable for their good looks have been known to
veil their faces, especially at festivals and markets, in order
to protect themselves against the evil eye.<note place='foot'>J. Wellhausen, <hi rend='italic'>Reste arabischen
Heidentums</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Berlin, 1897), p. 196.</note> The same
reason may explain the custom of muffling their faces which
has been observed by Arab women from the earliest times<note place='foot'>Tertullian, <hi rend='italic'>De virginibus velandis</hi>,
17 (Migne's <hi rend='italic'>Patrologia Latina</hi>, ii.
col. 912).</note>
and by the women of Boeotian Thebes in antiquity.<note place='foot'>Pseudo-Dicaearchus, <hi rend='italic'>Descriptio
Graeciae</hi>, 18, in <hi rend='italic'>Geographi Graeci
Minores</hi>, ed. C. Müller, i. 103; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
in <hi rend='italic'>Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum</hi>,
ed. C. Müller, ii. 259.</note> In
Samoa a man whose family god was the turtle might not
eat a turtle, and if he helped a neighbour to cut up and
cook one he had to wear a bandage tied over his mouth lest
an embryo turtle should slip down his throat, grow up, and
be his death.<note place='foot'>G. Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi>, pp. 67 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In West Timor a speaker holds his right
hand before his mouth in speaking lest a demon should
enter his body, and lest the person with whom he converses
should harm the speaker's soul by magic.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <q>Die Landschaft
Dawan oder West-Timor,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche
geographische Blätter</hi>, x. 230.</note> In New South
Wales for some time after his initiation into the tribal
mysteries, a young blackfellow (whose soul at this time is in
a critical state) must always cover his mouth with a rug when
a woman is present.<note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <q>On some Australian
Ceremonies of Initiation,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xiii. (1884) p. 456.</note> We have already seen how common is
the notion that the life or soul may escape by the mouth or
nostrils.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='4. Taboos on quitting the House.'/>
<head>§ 4. Taboos on quitting the House.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Kings forbidden
to
leave their
palaces or
to be seen
abroad by
their subjects.</note>
By an extension of the like precaution kings are sometimes
forbidden ever to leave their palaces; or, if they are
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
allowed to do so, their subjects are forbidden to see them
abroad. We have seen that the priestly king at Shark
Point, West Africa, may never quit his house or even his
chair, in which he is obliged to sleep sitting; and that the
king of Fernando Po, whom no white man may see, is
reported to be confined to his house with shackles on his
legs.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The fetish king of Benin, who was worshipped as a
deity by his subjects, might not quit his palace.<note place='foot'>This rule was mentioned to me in
conversation by Miss Mary H. Kingsley.
However, he is said to have shewn
himself outside his palace on solemn
occasions once or twice a year. See
O. Dapper, <hi rend='italic'>Description de l'Afrique</hi>,
pp. 311 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; H. Ling Roth, <hi rend='italic'>Great
Benin</hi>, p. 74. As to the worship of the
king of Benin, see <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and
the Evolution of Kings</hi>, vol. i. p. 396.</note> After his
coronation the king of Loango is confined to his palace,
which he may not leave.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsche Expedition
an der Loango-Küste</hi>, i. 263.
However, a case is recorded in which he
marched out to war (<hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> i. 268 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).</note> The king of Onitsha, on the
Niger, <q>does not step out of his house into the town unless
a human sacrifice is made to propitiate the gods: on this
account he never goes out beyond the precincts of his
premises.</q><note place='foot'>S. Crowther and J. C. Taylor,
<hi rend='italic'>The Gospel on the Banks of the Niger</hi>
(London, 1859), p. 433.</note> Indeed we are told that he may not quit his
palace under pain of death or of giving up one or more
slaves to be executed in his presence. As the wealth of the
country is measured in slaves, the king takes good care not
to infringe the law. One day the monarch, charmed by
some presents which he had received from a French officer,
politely attended his visitor to the gate, and in a moment of
forgetfulness was about to break bounds, when his chamberlain,
seizing his majesty by his legs, and his wives, friends,
and servants rushing up, prevented him from taking so fatal
a step. Yet once a year at the Feast of Yams the king is
allowed, and even required by custom, to dance before his
people outside the high mud wall of the palace. In dancing
he carries a great weight, generally a sack of earth, on his
back to prove that he is still able to support the burden and
cares of state. Were he unable to discharge this duty, he
would be immediately deposed and perhaps stoned.<note place='foot'>Le Commandant Mattei, <hi rend='italic'>Bas-Niger,
Bénoué, Dahomey</hi> (Paris, 1895),
pp. 67-72. The annual dance of the
king of Onitsha outside of his palace
is mentioned also by S. Crowther and
J. C. Taylor (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 379), and
A. F. Mockler-Ferryman (<hi rend='italic'>Up the
Niger</hi>, p. 22).</note> The
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
Tomas or Habes, a hardy race of mountaineers who inhabit
Mount Bandiagara in Nigeria, revere a great fetish doctor
called the Ogom, who is not suffered to quit his house on
any pretext.<note place='foot'><q>Mission Voulet-Chanoine,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin
de la Société de Géographie</hi> (Paris),
VIIIme Série, xx. (1899) p. 223.</note> Among the natives of the Cross River in
Southern Nigeria the sacred chiefs of certain villages are
confined to their compounds, that is, to the enclosures in
which their houses are built. Such chiefs may be confined
for years within these narrow bounds. <q>Among these
primitive people, the head chief is often looked upon as half
divine, the human representative of their ancestral god. He
regulates their religious rites, and is by some tribes believed
to have the power of making rain fall when they require
it, and of bringing them good harvests. So, being of
such value to the community, he is not permitted,
except on very rare occasions, to go outside his compound,
lest evil should befall him, and the whole town have
to suffer.</q><note place='foot'>C. Partridge, <hi rend='italic'>Cross River Natives</hi>
(London, 1905), p. 7; compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> pp.
8, 200, 202, 203 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> See also Major
A. G. Leonard, <hi rend='italic'>The Lower Niger and
its Tribes</hi> (London, 1906), pp. 371 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The kings of Ethiopia were worshipped as
gods, but were mostly kept shut up in their palaces.<note place='foot'>Strabo, xvii. 2. 2 σέβονται δ᾽ ὡς
θεοὺς τουσ βασιλεασ, κατακλειστουσ οντασ
και οἰκουροὺς τὸ πλέον.</note> On
the mountainous coast of Pontus there dwelt in antiquity a
rude and warlike people named the Mosyni or Mosynoeci,
through whose rugged country the Ten Thousand marched
on their famous retreat from Asia to Europe. These
barbarians kept their king in close custody at the top of
a high tower, from which after his election he was never
more allowed to descend. Here he dispensed justice to his
people; but if he offended them, they punished him by
stopping his rations for a whole day, or even starving him
to death.<note place='foot'>Xenophon, <hi rend='italic'>Anabasis</hi>, v. 4. 26;
Scymnus Chius, <hi rend='italic'>Orbis descriptio</hi>, 900
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Geographi Graeci Minores</hi>, ed. C.
Müller, i. 234); Diodorus Siculus,
xiv. 30. 6 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Nicolaus Damascenus,
quoted by Stobeaus, <hi rend='italic'>Florilegium</hi>, xliv.
41 (vol. ii. p. 185, ed. Meineke);
Apollonius Rhodius, <hi rend='italic'>Argon.</hi> ii. 1026,
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, with the note of the scholiast;
Pomponius Mela, i. 106, p. 29, ed.
Parthey. Die Chrysostom refers to the
custom without mentioning the name
of the people (<hi rend='italic'>Or.</hi> xiv. vol. i. p. 257,
ed. L. Dindorf).</note> The kings of Sabaea or Sheba, the spice country
of Arabia, were not allowed to go out of their palaces; if they
did so, the mob stoned them to death.<note place='foot'>Strabo, xvi. 4. 19, p. 778; Diodorus
Siculus, iii. 47. Inscriptions found in
Sheba (the country about two hundred
miles north of Aden) seem to shew
that the land was at first ruled by a
succession of priestly kings, who were
afterwards followed by kings in the
ordinary sense. The names of many
of these priestly kings (<foreign rend='italic'>makarribs</foreign>, literally
<q>blessers</q>) are preserved in inscriptions.
See Prof. S. R. Driver, in
<hi rend='italic'>Authority and Archaeology Sacred and
Profane</hi>, edited by D. G. Hogarth
(London, 1899), p. 82. Probably these
<q>blessers</q> are the kings referred to by
the Greek writers. We may suppose
that the blessings they dispensed consisted
in a proper regulation of the
weather, abundance of the fruits of the
earth, and so on.</note> But at the top of
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
the palace there was a window with a chain attached to it.
If any man deemed he had suffered wrong, he pulled the
chain, and the king perceived him and called him in and
gave judgment.<note place='foot'>Heraclides Cumanus, in Athenaeus,
xii. 13, p. 517 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi></note> So down to recent times the kings of
Corea, whose persons were sacred and received <q>honours
almost divine,</q> were shut up in their palace from the age of
twelve or fifteen; and if a suitor wished to obtain justice of
the king he sometimes lit a great bonfire on a mountain
facing the palace; the king saw the fire and informed
himself of the case.<note place='foot'>Ch. Dallet, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de l'Église de
Coreé</hi> (Paris, 1874), i. pp. xxiv-xxvi.
The king sometimes, though rarely,
left his palace. When he did so, notice
was given beforehand to his people.
All doors must be shut and each householder
must kneel before his threshold
with a broom and a dust-pan in his
hand. All windows, especially the
upper ones, must be sealed with slips
of paper, lest some one should look
down upon the king. See W. E.
Griffis, <hi rend='italic'>Corea, the Hermit Nation</hi>, p.
222. These customs are now obsolete
(G. N. Curzon, <hi rend='italic'>Problems of the Far
East</hi>, Westminster, 1896, pp. 154 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
note).</note> The Emperor of China seldom quits
his palace, and when he does so, no one may look at him;
even the guards who line the road must turn their backs.<note place='foot'>This I learned from the late Mr.
W. Simpson, formerly artist of the
<hi rend='italic'>Illustrated London News</hi>.</note>
The king of Tonquin was permitted to appear abroad twice
or thrice a year for the performance of certain religious
ceremonies; but the people were not allowed to look at
him. The day before he came forth notice was given to all
the inhabitants of the city and country to keep from the
way the king was to go; the women were obliged to remain
in their houses and durst not shew themselves under pain of
death, a penalty which was carried out on the spot if any
one disobeyed the order, even through ignorance. Thus the
king was invisible to all but his troops and the officers of
his suite.<note place='foot'>Richard, <q>History of Tonquin,</q>
in Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>,
ix. 746.</note> In Mandalay a stout lattice-paling, six feet high
and carefully kept in repair, lined every street in the walled
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
city and all those streets in the suburbs through which the
king was likely at any time to pass. Behind this paling,
which stood two feet or so from the houses, all the people
had to stay when the king or any of the queens went out.
Any one who was caught outside it by the beadles after the
procession had started was severely handled, and might
think himself lucky if he got off with a beating. Nobody
was supposed to peep through the holes in the lattice-work,
which were besides partly stopped up with flowering shrubs.<note place='foot'>Shway Yoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Burman</hi> (London, 1882), i. 30 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; compare <hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>,
xx. (1891) p. 49.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='5. Taboos on leaving Food over.'/>
<head>§ 5. Taboos on leaving Food over.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Magical
harm done
a man
through
the remains
of his food
or the
dishes he
has eaten
out of.
Ideas and
customs
of the
Narrinyeri
of South
Australia.</note>
Again, magic mischief may be wrought upon a man
through the remains of the food he has partaken of, or the
dishes out of which he has eaten. On the principles of
sympathetic magic a real connexion continues to subsist
between the food which a man has in his stomach and the
refuse of it which he has left untouched, and hence by
injuring the refuse you can simultaneously injure the eater.
Among the Narrinyeri of South Australia every adult is
constantly on the look-out for bones of beasts, birds, or fish,
of which the flesh has been eaten by somebody, in order to
construct a deadly charm out of them. Every one is therefore
careful to burn the bones of the animals which he has
eaten lest they should fall into the hands of a sorcerer. Too
often, however, the sorcerer succeeds in getting hold of such
a bone, and when he does so he believes that he has the
power of life and death over the man, woman, or child who
ate the flesh of the animal. To put the charm in operation
he makes a paste of red ochre and fish oil, inserts in it the
eye of a cod and a small piece of the flesh of a corpse, and
having rolled the compound into a ball sticks it on the top
of the bone. After being left for some time in the bosom of
a dead body, in order that it may derive a deadly potency
by contact with corruption, the magical implement is set up
in the ground near the fire, and as the ball melts, so the
person against whom the charm is directed wastes with
disease; if the ball is melted quite away, the victim will die.
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
When the bewitched man learns of the spell that is being
cast upon him, he endeavours to buy the bone from the
sorcerer, and if he obtains it he breaks the charm by throwing
the bone into a river or lake.<note place='foot'>G. Taplin, <q>The Narrinyeri,</q> in
<hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South Australia</hi>
(Adelaide, 1879), pp. 24-26; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, in E.
M. Curr, <hi rend='italic'>The Australian Race</hi>, ii. p.
247.</note> Further, the Narrinyeri think
that if a man eats of the totem animal of his tribe, and an
enemy obtains a portion of the flesh, the latter can make it
grow in the inside of the eater, and so cause his death.
Therefore when a man partakes of his totem he is careful
either to eat it all or else to conceal or destroy the refuse.<note place='foot'>G. Taplin, <q>The Narrinyeri,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South Australia</hi>,
p. 63; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Notes on the Mixed
Races of Australia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, iv. (1875) p.
53; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, in E. M. Curr, <hi rend='italic'>The Australian
Race</hi>, ii. 245.</note>
In the Encounter Bay tribe of South Australia, when a man
cannot get the bone of an animal which his enemy has eaten,
he cooks a bird, beast, or fish, and keeping back one of the
creature's bones, offers the rest under the guise of friendship
to his enemy. If the man is simple enough to partake of
the proffered food, he is at the mercy of his perfidious foe, who
can kill him by placing the abstracted bone near the fire.<note place='foot'>H. E. A. Meyer, <q>Manners and
Customs of the Aborigines of the
Encounter Bay Tribe,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Native
Tribes of South Australia</hi>, p. 196.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ideas and
customs
as to the
leavings
of food in
Melanesia
and New
Guinea.</note>
Ideas and practices of the same sort prevail, or used to
prevail, in Melanesia; all that was needed to injure a
man was to bring the leavings of his food into contact
with a malignant ghost or spirit. Hence in the island of
Florida when a scrap of an enemy's dinner was secreted
and thrown into a haunted place, the man was supposed
to fall ill; and in the New Hebrides if a snake of a certain
sort carried away a fragment of food to a spot sacred to
a spirit, the man who had eaten the food would sicken as
the fragment decayed. In Aurora the refuse is made up by
the wizard with certain leaves; as these rot and stink, the
man dies. Hence it is, or was, a constant care with the
Melanesians to prevent the remains of their meals from
falling into the hands of persons who bore them a grudge;
for this reason they regularly gave the refuse of food to
the pigs.<note place='foot'>R. H. Codrington, <hi rend='italic'>The Melanesians</hi>,
pp. 203 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, compare pp. 178,
188, 214.</note> In Tana, one of the New Hebrides, people bury
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
or throw into the sea the leavings of their food, lest these
should fall into the hands of the disease-makers. For if
a disease-maker finds the remnants of a meal, say the skin
of a banana, he picks it up and burns it slowly in the fire.
As it burns, the person who ate the banana falls ill and sends
to the disease-maker, offering him presents if he will stop
burning the banana skin.<note place='foot'>G. Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi>, pp. 302 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, i. 341 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In German New Guinea the
natives take the utmost care to destroy or conceal the husks
and other remains of their food, lest these should be found
by their enemies and used by them for the injury or destruction
of the eaters. Hence they burn their leavings,
throw them into the sea, or otherwise put them out of
harm's way. To such an extent does this fear influence
them that many people dare not stir beyond the territory of
their own village, lest they should leave behind them on the
land of their neighbours something by means of which a
hostile sorcerer might do them a mischief.<note place='foot'>K. Vetter, <hi rend='italic'>Komm herüber und hilf
uns!</hi> iii. (Barmen, 1898) p. 9; M.
Krieger, <hi rend='italic'>Neu-Guinea</hi>, pp. 185 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
R. Parkinson, <q>Die Berlinhafen
Section, ein Beitrag zur Ethnographie
der Neu-Guinea Küste,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Internationales
Archiv für Ethnographie</hi>, xiii. (1900)
p. 44; M. J. Erdweg, <q>Die Bewohner
der Insel Tumleo, Berlinhafen, Deutsch-Neu-Guinea,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen der
Anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien</hi>,
xxxii. (1902) p. 287.</note> Similar fears
have led to similar customs in New Britain and the other
islands of what is now called the Bismarck Archipelago, off
the north coast of New Guinea. There also the natives bury,
burn, or throw into the sea the remains of their meals to
prevent them from falling into the hands of magicians;
there also the more superstitious of them will not eat in
another village because they dread the use which a sorcerer
might make of their leavings when their back is turned.
This theory has led to an odd practical result; all the cats
in the islands of the Archipelago go about with stumpy tails.
The reason of the peculiarity is this. The natives sometimes
roast and eat their cats; and unscrupulous persons might
be tempted to steal a neighbour's cat in order to furnish
a meal. Accordingly, in the interests of the higher morality
people remove this stumbling-block from the path of their
weaker brothers by docking their cats of a piece of their
tails and keeping the severed portions in a secret place. If
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
now a cat is stolen and eaten, the lawful owner of the animal
has it in his power to avenge the crime: he need only bury
the piece of tail with certain spells in the ground, and the
thief will fall ill. Hence a man will hardly dare to
steal and eat a cat with a stumpy tail, knowing the
righteous retribution that would sooner or later overtake
him for so doing.<note place='foot'>Mgr. Couppé, <q>En Nouvelle-Poméranie,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Missions Catholiques</hi>,
xxiii. (1891) p. 364; J. Graf Pfeil,
<hi rend='italic'>Studien und Beobachtungen aus der
Südsee</hi> (Brunswick, 1899), pp. 141 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
P. A. Kleintitschen, <hi rend='italic'>Die Küstenbewohner
der Gazellehalbinsel</hi> (Hiltrup
bei Münster, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), pp. 343 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ideas and
customs
as to the
leavings
of food in
Africa,
Celebes,
India, and
ancient
Rome.</note>
From a like fear, no doubt, of sorcery, no one may
touch the food which the king of Loango leaves upon
his plate; it is buried in a hole in the ground. And no one
may drink out of the king's vessel.<note place='foot'>O. Dapper, <hi rend='italic'>Description de l'Afrique</hi>,
p. 330. We have seen that the food
left by the king of the Monbutto, is
carefully buried (above, p. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>).</note> Similarly, no man may
drink out of the same cup or glass with the king of Fida
(Whydah) in Guinea; <q>he hath always one kept particularly
for himself; and that which hath but once touched another's
lips he never uses more, though it be made of metal that may
be cleansed by fire.</q><note place='foot'>Bosman's <q>Guinea,</q> in Pinkerton's
<hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, xvi. 487.</note> Amongst the Alfoors of Celebes
there is a priest called the <foreign rend='italic'>Leleen</foreign>, whose duty appears to be
to make the rice grow. His functions begin about a month
before the rice is sown, and end after the crop is housed.
During this time he has to observe certain taboos; amongst
others he may not eat or drink with any one else, and he
may drink out of no vessel but his own.<note place='foot'>P. N. Wilken, <q>Bijdragen tot de
kennis van de zeden en gewoonten
der Alfoeren in de Minahassa,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap</hi>, vii. (1863) p.
126.</note> An ancient
Indian way of injuring an enemy was to offer him a meal
of rice and afterwards throw the remains of the rice into a
fishpond; if the fish swam up in large numbers to devour
the grains, the man's fate was sealed.<note place='foot'>W. Caland, <hi rend='italic'>Altindisches Zauberritual</hi>,
pp. 163 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In antiquity the
Romans used immediately to break the shells of eggs and of
snails which they had eaten in order to prevent enemies
from making magic with them.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xxviii. 19. For
other examples of witchcraft wrought
by means of the refuse of food, see
E. S. Hartland, <hi rend='italic'>The Legend of Perseus</hi>,
ii. 83 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The common practice,
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
still observed among us, of breaking egg-shells after the
eggs have been eaten may very well have originated in the
same superstition.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The fear
of the
magical
evil which
may be
done a man
through
his food
has had
beneficial
effects in
fostering
habits of
cleanliness
and in
strengthening
the
ties of
hospitality.</note>
The superstitious fear of the magic that may be wrought
on a man through the leavings of his food has had the
beneficial effect of inducing many savages to destroy refuse
which, if left to rot, might through its corruption have
proved a real, not a merely imaginary, source of disease
and death. Nor is it only the sanitary condition of a
tribe which has benefited by this superstition; curiously
enough the same baseless dread, the same false notion of
causation, has indirectly strengthened the moral bonds of
hospitality, honour, and good faith among men who entertain
it. For it is obvious that no one who intends to
harm a man by working magic on the refuse of his food
will himself partake of that food, because if he did so
he would, on the principles of sympathetic magic, suffer
equally with his enemy from any injury done to the
refuse. This is the idea which in primitive society lends
sanctity to the bond produced by eating together; by
participation in the same food two men give, as it were,
hostages for their good behaviour; each guarantees the
other that he will devise no mischief against him, since,
being physically united with him by the common food in
their stomachs, any harm he might do to his fellow would
recoil on his own head with precisely the same force with
which it fell on the head of his victim. In strict logic,
however, the sympathetic bond lasts only so long as the
food is in the stomach of each of the parties. Hence the
covenant formed by eating together is less solemn and
durable than the covenant formed by transfusing the blood
of the covenanting parties into each other's veins, for this
transfusion seems to knit them together for life.<note place='foot'>On the covenant entered into by
eating together see the classical exposition
of W. Robertson Smith, <hi rend='italic'>The
Religion of the Semites</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (London,
1894), pp. 269 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> For examples
of the blood-covenant, see H. C. Trumbull,
<hi rend='italic'>The Blood Covenant</hi> (London,
1887). The examples might easily be
multiplied.</note>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV. Tabooed Persons.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. Chiefs and Kings tabooed.'/>
<head>§ 1. Chiefs and Kings tabooed.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Disastrous
results supposed
to
follow from
using the
dishes of
the Mikado
or of a
Fijian
chief. Sacred persons
are a
source of
danger to
others:
their
divinity
burns like a
fire what it
touches.
African
examples.</note>
We have seen that the Mikado's food was cooked every
day in new pots and served up in new dishes; both pots
and dishes were of common clay, in order that they might
be broken or laid aside after they had been once used.
They were generally broken, for it was believed that if any
one else ate his food out of these sacred dishes, his mouth
and throat would become swollen and inflamed. The same
ill effect was thought to be experienced by any one who
should wear the Mikado's clothes without his leave; he
would have swellings and pains all over his body.<note place='foot'>Kaempfer's <q>History of Japan,</q>
in Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>,
vii. 717.</note> In Fiji
there is a special name (<foreign rend='italic'>kana lama</foreign>) for the disease supposed
to be caused by eating out of a chief's dishes or wearing his
clothes. <q>The throat and body swell, and the impious
person dies. I had a fine mat given to me by a man who
durst not use it because Thakambau's eldest son had sat
upon it. There was always a family or clan of commoners
who were exempt from this danger. I was talking about
this once to Thakambau. <q>Oh yes,</q> said he. <q>Here, So-and-so!
come and scratch my back.</q> The man scratched; he
was one of those who could do it with impunity.</q> The
name of the men thus highly privileged was <foreign rend='italic'>Na nduka ni</foreign>,
or the dirt of the chief.<note place='foot'>Rev. Lorimer Fison, in a letter to
me dated August 26, 1898. In Fijian,
<foreign rend='italic'>kana</foreign> is to eat; the meaning of <foreign rend='italic'>lama</foreign> is
unknown.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The taboo
of chiefs
and kings
in Tonga. The King's
Evil cured
by the
king's
touch.</note>
In the evil effects thus supposed to follow upon the use
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
of the vessels or clothes of the Mikado and a Fijian chief
we see that other side of the god-man's character to which
attention has been already called. The divine person is a
source of danger as well as of blessing; he must not only
be guarded, he must also be guarded against. His sacred
organism, so delicate that a touch may disorder it, is also,
as it were, electrically charged with a powerful magical or
spiritual force which may discharge itself with fatal effect
on whatever comes in contact with it. Accordingly the
isolation of the man-god is quite as necessary for the safety
of others as for his own. His magical virtue is in the
strictest sense of the word contagious: his divinity is a
fire, which, under proper restraints, confers endless blessings,
but, if rashly touched or allowed to break bounds,
burns and destroys what it touches. Hence the disastrous
effects supposed to attend a breach of taboo; the offender
has thrust his hand into the divine fire, which shrivels
up and consumes him on the spot. The Nubas, for example,
who inhabit the wooded and fertile range of Jebel
Nuba in eastern Africa, believe that they would die if they
entered the house of their priestly king; however they
can evade the penalty of their intrusion by baring the left
shoulder and getting the king to lay his hand on it. And
were any man to sit on a stone which the king has
consecrated to his own use, the transgressor would die
within the year.<note place='foot'><q>Coutumes étranges des indigènes
du Djebel-Nouba,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Missions Catholiques</hi>,
xiv. (1882) p. 460; Father S.
Carceri, <q>Djebel-Nouba,</q> <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> xv.
(1883) p. 450. The title of the
priestly king is <foreign rend='italic'>cogiour</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>codjour</foreign>.
<q>The <foreign rend='italic'>codjour</foreign> is the pontifical king of
each group of villages; it is he who
regulates and administers the affairs of
the Nubas. He is an absolute monarch,
on whom all depend. But he has no
princely privileges or immunities; no
royal insignia, no badge mark him off
from his subjects. He lives like them
by the produce of his fields and his
industry; he works like them, earns
his daily bread, and has no guard of
honour, no tribunal, no code of laws,
no civil list</q> (Father S. Carceri, <hi rend='italic'>loc.
cit.</hi>).</note> The Cazembes, in the interior of Angola,
regard their king (the <foreign rend='italic'>Muata</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>Mambo</foreign>) as so holy that no
one can touch him without being killed by the magical
power which pervades his sacred person. But since contact
with him is sometimes unavoidable, they have devised a
means whereby the sinner can escape with his life. Kneeling
down before the king he touches the back of the royal hand
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
with the back of his own, then snaps his fingers; afterwards
he lays the palm of his hand on the palm of the king's
hand, then snaps his fingers again. This ceremony is
repeated four or five times, and averts the imminent danger
of death.<note place='foot'><q>Der Muata Cazembe und die
Völkerstämme der Maravis, Chevas,
Muembas, Lundas und andere von
Süd-Afrika,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für allgemeine
Erdkunde</hi> (Berlin), vi. (1856) pp.
398 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; F. T. Valdez, <hi rend='italic'>Six Years of a
Traveller's Life in Western Africa</hi>
(London, 1861), ii. 251 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Tonga it was believed that if any one fed
himself with his own hands after touching the sacred person
of a superior chief or anything that belonged to him, he
would swell up and die; the sanctity of the chief, like a
virulent poison, infected the hands of his inferior, and, being
communicated through them to the food, proved fatal to the
eater. A commoner who had incurred this danger could
disinfect himself by performing a certain ceremony, which
consisted in touching the sole of a chief's foot with the palm
and back of each of his hands, and afterwards rinsing his
hands in water. If there was no water near, he rubbed his
hands with the juicy stem of a plantain or banana. After
that he was free to feed himself with his own hands without
danger of being attacked by the malady which would otherwise
follow from eating with tabooed or sanctified hands.
But until the ceremony of expiation or disinfection had been
performed, if he wished to eat, he had either to get some
one to feed him, or else to go down on his knees and pick
up the food from the ground with his mouth like a beast.
He might not even use a toothpick himself, but might guide
the hand of another person holding the toothpick. The
Tongans were subject to induration of the liver and certain
forms of scrofula, which they often attributed to a failure to
perform the requisite expiation after having inadvertently
touched a chief or his belongings. Hence they often went
through the ceremony as a precaution, without knowing that
they had done anything to call for it. The king of Tonga
could not refuse to play his part in the rite by presenting
his foot to such as desired to touch it, even when they
applied to him at an inconvenient time. A fat unwieldy
king, who perceived his subjects approaching with this
intention, while he chanced to be taking his walks abroad,
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
has been sometimes seen to waddle as fast as his legs could
carry him out of their way, in order to escape the importunate
and not wholly disinterested expression of their
homage. If any one fancied he might have already unwittingly
eaten with tabooed hands, he sat down before the
chief, and, taking the chief's foot, pressed it against his own
stomach, that the food in his belly might not injure him,
and that he might not swell up and die.<note place='foot'>W. Mariner, <hi rend='italic'>The Natives of the
Tonga Islands</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. 141 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> note, 434
note, ii. 82 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 221-224; Captain J.
Cook, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages</hi> (London, 1809), v. 427
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Similarly in Fiji any person who
had touched the head of a living chief
or the body of a dead one was forbidden
to handle his food, and must
be fed by another (J. E. Erskine,
<hi rend='italic'>The Western Pacific</hi>, p. 254).</note> Since scrofula was
regarded by the Tongans as a result of eating with tabooed
hands, we may conjecture that persons who suffered from it
among them often resorted to the touch or pressure of the
king's foot as a cure for their malady. The analogy of the
custom with the old English practice of bringing scrofulous
patients to the king to be healed by his touch is sufficiently
obvious, and suggests, as I have already pointed out elsewhere,
that among our own remote ancestors scrofula may have
obtained its name of the King's Evil, from a belief, like
that of the Tongans, that it was caused as well as cured
by contact with the divine majesty of kings.<note place='foot'>On the custom of touching for
the King's Evil, see <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art
and the Evolution of Kings</hi>, vol. i.
pp. 368 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Fatal
effects of
contact
with sacred
chiefs in
New
Zealand.</note>
In New Zealand the dread of the sanctity of chiefs was
at least as great as in Tonga. Their ghostly power, derived
from an ancestral spirit or <foreign rend='italic'>atua</foreign>, diffused itself by contagion
over everything they touched, and could strike dead all who
rashly or unwittingly meddled with it.<note place='foot'><q>The idea in which this law [the
law of taboo or <foreign rend='italic'>tapu</foreign>, as it was called
in New Zealand] originated appears
to have been, that a portion of the
spiritual essence of an <foreign rend='italic'>atua</foreign> or of a
sacred person was communicated
directly to objects which they touched,
and also that the spiritual essence
so communicated to any object was
afterwards more or less retransmitted
to anything else brought into contact
with it</q> (E. Shortland, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions and
Superstitions of the New Zealanders</hi>,
Second Edition, London, 1856, p.
102). Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Maori Religion
and Mythology</hi>, p. 25.</note> For instance, it
once happened that a New Zealand chief of high rank and
great sanctity had left the remains of his dinner by the
wayside. A slave, a stout, hungry fellow, coming up after
the chief had gone, saw the unfinished dinner, and ate it
up without asking questions. Hardly had he finished when
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
he was informed by a horror-stricken spectator that the
food of which he had eaten was the chief's. <q>I knew the
unfortunate delinquent well. He was remarkable for
courage, and had signalised himself in the wars of the
tribe,</q> but <q>no sooner did he hear the fatal news than he
was seized by the most extraordinary convulsions and
cramp in the stomach, which never ceased till he died, about
sundown the same day. He was a strong man, in the
prime of life, and if any pakeha [European] freethinker
should have said he was not killed by the <foreign rend='italic'>tapu</foreign> of the chief,
which had been communicated to the food by contact, he
would have been listened to with feelings of contempt for
his ignorance and inability to understand plain and direct
evidence.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Old New Zealand</hi>, by a Pakeha
Maori (London, 1884), pp. 96 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> This is not a solitary case. A Maori woman
having eaten of some fruit, and being afterwards told that
the fruit had been taken from a tabooed place, exclaimed
that the spirit of the chief, whose sanctity had been thus
profaned, would kill her. This was in the afternoon, and
next day by twelve o'clock she was dead.<note place='foot'>W. Brown, <hi rend='italic'>New Zealand and its
Aborigines</hi> (London, 1845), p. 76.
For more examples of the same kind
see <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> pp. 177 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> An observer
who knows the Maoris well, says, <q>Tapu [taboo] is an awful
weapon. I have seen a strong young man die the same
day he was tapued; the victims die under it as though
their strength ran out as water.</q><note place='foot'>E. Tregear, <q>The Maoris of
New Zealand,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xix. (1890) p.
100.</note> A Maori chief's tinder-box
was once the means of killing several persons; for,
having been lost by him, and found by some men who used
it to light their pipes, they died of fright on learning to
whom it had belonged. So, too, the garments of a high
New Zealand chief will kill any one else who wears them.
A chief was observed by a missionary to throw down a
precipice a blanket which he found too heavy to carry.
Being asked by the missionary why he did not leave it on
a tree for the use of a future traveller, the chief replied that
<q>it was the fear of its being taken by another which caused
him to throw it where he did, for if it were worn, his tapu</q>
(that is, his spiritual power communicated by contact to
the blanket and through the blanket to the man) <q>would
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
kill the person.</q><note place='foot'>R. Taylor, <hi rend='italic'>Te Ika a Maui, or,
New Zealand and its Inhabitants</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p.
164.</note> For a similar reason a Maori chief would
not blow a fire with his mouth; for his sacred breath would
communicate its sanctity to the fire, which would pass it on
to the pot on the fire, which would pass it on to the meat in
the pot, which would pass it on to the man who ate the
meat, which was in the pot, which stood on the fire, which
was breathed on by the chief; so that the eater, infected by
the chief's breath conveyed through these intermediaries,
would surely die.<note place='foot'>R. Taylor, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 165.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Examples
of the fatal
effects of
imagination
in
other parts
of the
world.</note>
Thus in the Polynesian race, to which the Maoris belong,
superstition erected round the persons of sacred chiefs a
real, though at the same time purely imaginary barrier, to
transgress which actually entailed the death of the transgressor
whenever he became aware of what he had done. This
fatal power of the imagination working through superstitious
terrors is by no means confined to one race; it appears to
be common among savages. For example, among the
aborigines of Australia a native will die after the infliction of
even the most superficial wound if only he believes that the
weapon which inflicted the wound had been sung over and
thus endowed with magical virtue. He simply lies down,
refuses food, and pines away.<note place='foot'>Spencer and Gillen, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes
of Central Australia</hi>, pp. 537 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Similarly among some of the
Indian tribes of Brazil, if the medicine-man predicted the
death of any one who had offended him, <q>the wretch took to
his hammock instantly in such full expectation of dying,
that he would neither eat nor drink, and the prediction was
a sentence which faith effectually executed.</q><note place='foot'>R. Southey, <hi rend='italic'>History of Brazil</hi>,
i.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (London, 1822), p. 238.</note> Speaking of
certain African races Major Leonard observes: <q>I have
seen more than one hardened old Haussa soldier dying
steadily and by inches, because he believed himself to be
bewitched; so that no nourishment or medicines that were
given to him had the slightest effect either to check the mischief
or to improve his condition in any way, and nothing
was able to divert him from a fate which he considered inevitable.
In the same way, and under very similar conditions,
I have seen Kru-men and others die, in spite of every effort
that was made to save them, simply because they had made
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
up their minds, not (as we thought at the time) to die, but
that being in the clutch of malignant demons they were
bound to die.</q><note place='foot'>Major A. G. Leonard, <hi rend='italic'>The Lower
Niger and its Tribes</hi> (London, 1906),
pp. 257 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Capuchin missionary Merolla da
Sorrento, who travelled in the West African kingdom of
Congo in the latter part of the seventeenth century, has
described a remarkable case of death wrought purely by
superstitious fear. He says: <q>It is a custom that either
the parents or the wizards give certain rules to be inviolably
observed by the young people, and which they call <foreign rend='italic'>chegilla</foreign>:
these are to abstain from eating either some sorts of poultry,
the flesh of some kinds of wild beasts, such and such fruits,
roots either raw or boiled after this or another manner, with
several other ridiculous injunctions of the like nature, too
many to be enumerated here. You would wonder with what
religious observance these commands are obeyed. These
young people would sooner chuse to fast several days together,
than to taste the least bit of what has been forbidden
them; and if it sometimes happen that the <foreign rend='italic'>chegilla</foreign> has been
neglected to have been given them by their parents, they
think they shall presently die unless they go immediately to
receive it from the wizards. A certain young negro, being
upon a journey, lodged in a friend's house by the way: his
friend, before he went out the next morning, had got a wild
hen ready for his breakfast, they being much better than the
tame ones. The negro hereupon demanded, <q>If it were a
wild hen?</q> His host answered, <q>No</q>: then he fell on
heartily, and afterwards proceeded on his journey. About
four years after these two met together again, and the aforesaid
negro being not yet married, his old friend asked him,
<q>If he would eat a wild hen?</q> To which he answered,
<q>That he had received the <foreign rend='italic'>chegilla</foreign>, and therefore could not.</q>
Hereat the host began immediately to laugh, enquiring of
him, <q>What made him refuse it now, when he had eaten one
at his table about four years ago?</q> At the hearing of this
the negro immediately fell a trembling, and suffered himself
to be so far possessed with the effects of imagination, that
he died in less than twenty-four hours after.</q><note place='foot'>Merolla's <q>Voyage to Congo,</q> in
Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, xvi.
237 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> As to these <foreign rend='italic'>chegilla</foreign> or taboos on
food, which are commonly observed by
the natives of this part of Africa, see
further my <hi rend='italic'>Totemism and Exogamy</hi>, ii.
614 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. Mourners tabooed.'/>
<head>§ 2. Mourners tabooed.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The taboos
observed
by sacred
kings resemble
those imposed
on
persons
who are
commonly
regarded as
unclean,
such as
menstruous
women,
homicides,
and so
forth.
Taboos
laid on
persons
who have
been in
contact
with the
dead in
New
Zealand.</note>
Thus regarding his sacred chiefs and kings as charged
with a mysterious spiritual force which so to say explodes at
contact, the savage naturally ranks them among the dangerous
classes of society, and imposes upon them the same
sort of restraints that he lays on manslayers, menstruous
women, and other persons whom he looks upon with a
certain fear and horror. For example, sacred kings and
priests in Polynesia were not allowed to touch food with
their hands, and had therefore to be fed by others;<note place='foot'>W. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>Polynesian Researches</hi>
(Second Edition, London, 1832-1836),
iv. 388. Ellis appears to imply that
the rule was universal in Polynesia,
but perhaps he refers only to Hawaii,
of which in this part of his work he is
specially treating. We are told that
in Hawaii the priest who carried the
principal idol about the country was
tabooed during the performance of this
sacred office; he might not touch anything
with his hands, and the morsels of
food which he ate had to be put into his
mouth by the chiefs of the villages
through which he passed or even by the
king himself, who accompanied the
priest on his rounds (L. de Freycinet,
<hi rend='italic'>Voyage autour du monde</hi>, Historique,
ii. Première Partie, Paris, 1829, p. 596).
In Tonga the rule applied to chiefs only
when their hands had become tabooed
by touching a superior chief (W. Mariner,
<hi rend='italic'>Tonga Islands</hi>, i. 82 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>). In New
Zealand chiefs were fed by slaves (A. S.
Thomson, <hi rend='italic'>The Story of New Zealand</hi>,
i. 102); or they may, like tabooed
people in general, have taken up their
food from little stages with their mouths
or by means of fern-stalks (R. Taylor,
<hi rend='italic'>Te Ika a Maui, or New Zealand and
its Inhabitants</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p. 162).</note> and as
we have just seen, their vessels, garments, and other property
might not be used by others on pain of disease and death.
Now precisely the same observances are exacted by some
savages from girls at their first menstruation, women after
childbirth, homicides, mourners, and all persons who have
come into contact with the dead. Thus, for example,
to begin with the last class of persons, among the
Maoris any one who had handled a corpse, helped to
convey it to the grave, or touched a dead man's bones, was
cut off from all intercourse and almost all communication
with mankind. He could not enter any house, or come into
contact with any person or thing, without utterly bedevilling
them. He might not even touch food with his hands, which
had become so frightfully tabooed or unclean as to be quite
useless. Food would be set for him on the ground, and he
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
would then sit or kneel down, and, with his hands carefully
held behind his back, would gnaw at it as best he could. In
some cases he would be fed by another person, who with
outstretched arm contrived to do it without touching the
tabooed man; but the feeder was himself subjected to many
severe restrictions, little less onerous than those which were
imposed upon the other. In almost every populous village
there lived a degraded wretch, the lowest of the low, who
earned a sorry pittance by thus waiting upon the defiled.
Clad in rags, daubed from head to foot with red ochre and
stinking shark oil, always solitary and silent, generally old,
haggard, and wizened, often half crazed, he might be seen
sitting motionless all day apart from the common path or
thoroughfare of the village, gazing with lack-lustre eyes on
the busy doings in which he might never take a part. Twice
a day a dole of food would be thrown on the ground before
him to munch as well as he could without the use of his
hands; and at night, huddling his greasy tatters about him,
he would crawl into some miserable lair of leaves and refuse,
where, dirty, cold, and hungry, he passed, in broken ghost-haunted
slumbers, a wretched night as a prelude to another
wretched day. Such was the only human being deemed fit
to associate at arm's length with one who had paid the last
offices of respect and friendship to the dead. And when, the
dismal term of his seclusion being over, the mourner was
about to mix with his fellows once more, all the dishes he
had used in his seclusion were diligently smashed, and all the
garments he had worn were carefully thrown away, lest they
should spread the contagion of his defilement among others,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Old New Zealand</hi>, by a Pakeha
Maori (London, 1884), pp. 104-114.
For more evidence see W. Yate, <hi rend='italic'>New
Zealand</hi>, p. 85; G. F. Angas, <hi rend='italic'>Savage
Life and Scenes in Australia and New
Zealand</hi>, ii. 90; E. Dieffenbach, <hi rend='italic'>Travels
in New Zealand</hi>, ii. 104 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J.
Dumont D'Urville, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage autour du
monde et à la recherche de La Pérouse</hi>,
ii. 530; Father Servant, <q>Notice sur la
Nouvelle Zélande,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Annales de la Propagation
de la Foi</hi>, xv. (1843) p. 22.</note>
just as the vessels and clothes of sacred kings and chiefs are
destroyed or cast away for a similar reason. So complete
in these respects is the analogy which the savage traces
between the spiritual influences that emanate from divinities
and from the dead, between the odour of sanctity and the
stench of corruption.
</p>

<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The rule
which forbids
persons
who
have been
in contact
with a
corpse to
touch food
with their
hands
seems to
have been
universal in
Polynesia. A rule of
the same
sort is observed
in
Melanesia
and Africa.</note>
The rule which forbids persons who have been in contact
with the dead to touch food with their hands would seem to
have been universal in Polynesia. Thus in Samoa <q>those
who attended the deceased were most careful not to handle
food, and for days were fed by others as if they were helpless
infants. Baldness and the loss of teeth were supposed to be
the punishment inflicted by the household god if they violated
the rule.</q><note place='foot'>G. Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi>, p. 145. Compare
G. Brown, D.D., <hi rend='italic'>Melanesians
and Polynesians</hi> (London, 1910), p.
402: <q>The men who took hold of
the body were <foreign rend='italic'>paia</foreign> (sacred) for the
time, were forbidden to touch their
own food, and were fed by others.
No food wad eaten in the same house
with the dead body.</q></note> Again, in Tonga, <q>no person can touch a dead
chief without being taboo'd for ten lunar months, except
chiefs, who are only taboo'd for three, four, or five months,
according to the superiority of the dead chief; except again
it be the body of Tooitonga [the great divine chief], and then
even the greatest chief would be taboo'd ten months, as was
the case with Finow's wife above mentioned. During the
time a man is taboo'd he must not feed himself with his own
hands, but must be fed by somebody else: he must not even
use a toothpick himself, but must guide another person's hand
holding the toothpick. If he is hungry and there is no one
to feed him, he must go down upon his hands and knees,
and pick up his victuals with his mouth: and if he infringes
upon any of these rules, it is firmly expected that he will
swell up and die: and this belief is so strong that Mr.
Mariner thinks no native ever made an experiment to prove
the contrary. They often saw him feed himself with his
hands after having touched dead chiefs, and not observing
his health to decline, they attributed it to his being a
foreigner, and being governed by different gods.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mariner, <hi rend='italic'>The Natives of the
Tonga Islands</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (London, 1818), i.
141 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, note.</note> Again, in
Wallis Island <q>contact with a corpse subjects the hands to
the law of taboo till they are washed, which is not done
for several weeks. Until that purification has taken place,
the tabooed persons may not themselves put food to their
mouths; other people render them that service.</q><note place='foot'>Father Bataillon, in <hi rend='italic'>Annales de la
Propagation de la Foi</hi>, xiii. (1841) p.
19. For more evidence of the practice
of this custom in Polynesia, see Captain
J. Cook, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages</hi> (London, 1809), vii.
147; James Wilson, <hi rend='italic'>Missionary Voyage
to the Southern Pacific Ocean</hi>
(London, 1799), p. 363.</note> A rule
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
of the same sort is or was observed in various parts of
Melanesia. Thus in Fiji the taboo for handling a dead chief
lasted from one to ten months according to his rank; for a
commoner it lasted not more than four days. It was
commonly resorted to by the lazy and idle; for during the
time of their seclusion they were not only provided with food,
but were actually fed by attendants or ate their food from
the ground.<note place='foot'>Ch. Wilkes, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the
United States Exploring Expedition</hi>,
New Edition (New York, 1851), iii.
99 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Similarly in the Motu tribe of New Guinea a
man is tabooed, generally for three days, after handling a
corpse, and while the taboo lasts he may not touch food
with his hands. At the end of the time he bathes and the
taboo is over.<note place='foot'>W. G. Lawes, <q>Ethnological
Notes on the Motu, Koitapu, and
Koiari Tribes of New Guinea,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Anthropological Institute</hi>, viii.
(1879) p. 370.</note> So in New Caledonia the two men who are
charged with the duty of burying and guarding a corpse
have to remain in seclusion and observe a number of rules of
abstinence. They live apart from their wives. They may not
shave or cut their hair. Their food is laid for them on leaves
and they take it up with their mouth or a stick; but oftener
an attendant feeds them, just as he might feed a man whose
limbs were palsied.<note place='foot'>Father Lambert, in <hi rend='italic'>Missions
Catholiques</hi>, xii. (1880) p. 365; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Mœurs et superstitions des Néo-Calédoniens</hi>
(Nouméa, 1900), pp. 238
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> So among the Nandi of British East
Africa persons who have handled a corpse bathe in a river,
anoint their bodies with fat, partially shave their heads, and
live in the hut of the deceased for four days. All these
days they may not be seen by boys or women: they may
not drink milk; and they may not touch food with their
hands, but must eat it with the help of a potsherd or chip
of a gourd.<note place='foot'>A. C. Hollis, <hi rend='italic'>The Nandi</hi> (Oxford,
1909), p. 70.</note> Similarly in the Ba-Pedi and Ba-Thonga
tribes of South Africa men who have dug a grave may not
touch food with their fingers till the rites of their purification
are accomplished; meantime they eat with the help of
special spoons. If they broke this rule, it is thought that they
would be consumptive.<note place='foot'>H. A. Junod, <q>Les Conceptions
physiologiques des Bantou sud-africains
et leurs tabous,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue d'Ethnographie
et de Sociologie</hi>, i. (1910) p. 153.</note> So in the Ngarigo tribe of New South
Wales a novice who has just passed through the ceremony
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
of initiation has to go away to the mountains and stay there
for a while, sometimes for more than six months, under the
charge of one or more old men; and all the time of his
absence among the mountains he may not touch cooked
food with his hands; the food is put into his mouth by the
man who looks after him.<note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of
South-East Australia</hi>, p. 563.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Taboos
laid on
mourners
among the
Indian
tribes of
North
America.</note>
Among the Shuswap of British Columbia widows and
widowers in mourning are secluded and forbidden to touch
their own head or body; the cups and cooking-vessels which
they use may be used by no one else. They must build
a sweat-house beside a creek, sweat there all night and
bathe regularly, after which they must rub their bodies
with branches of spruce. The branches may not be used
more than once, and when they have served their purpose
they are stuck into the ground all round the hut. No hunter
would come near such mourners, for their presence is unlucky.
If their shadow were to fall on any one, he would be taken
ill at once. They employ thorn bushes for bed and pillow,
in order to keep away the ghost of the deceased; and thorn
bushes are also laid all around their beds.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, in <hi rend='italic'>Sixth Report on the
North-Western Tribes of Canada</hi>, pp. 91
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (separate Reprint from the <hi rend='italic'>Report of
the British Association for 1890</hi>).</note> This last precaution
shews clearly what the spiritual danger is which
leads to the exclusion of such persons from ordinary society;
it is simply a fear of the ghost who is supposed to be hovering
near them. Among the Thompson Indians of British
Columbia the persons who handled a corpse and dug the
grave were secluded for four days. They fasted until the
body was buried, after which they were given food apart
from the other people. They would not touch the food with
their hands, but must put it into their mouths with sharp-pointed
sticks. They ate off a small mat, and drank out of
birch-bark cups, which, together with the mat, were thrown
away at the end of the four days. The first four mouthfuls
of food, as well as of water, had to be spit into the fire.
During their seclusion they bathed in a stream and might
not sleep with their wives. Widows and widowers were
obliged to observe rules of a similar kind. Immediately
after the death they went out and passed through a patch of
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
rose-bushes four times, probably in order to rid themselves
of the ghost, who might be supposed to stick on a thorn.
For a year they had to sleep on a bed of fir-boughs, on
which sticks of rose-bushes were laid; many wore twigs of
rose-bush and juniper in a piece of buckskin on their persons.
The first four days they might not touch their food, but ate
with sharp-pointed sticks and spat out the first four mouthfuls
of each meal, and the first four of water, into the fire. A
widower might not fish at another man's fishing-place or
with another man's net; if he did, it would make the place
and the net useless for the season. If he transplanted a
trout into another lake, before releasing it he blew on the
head of the fish, and after chewing deer-fat, he spat some of
the grease on its head in order to remove the baneful effect
of his touch. Then he let the trout go, bidding it farewell,
and asking it to propagate its kind in plenty. Any grass
or branches that a widow or widower sat or lay down on
withered up. If a widow should break sticks or boughs, her
hands or arms would also break. She might not pick berries
for a year, else the whole crop of berries would fall off the
bushes or wither up. She might not cook food or fetch
water for her children, nor let them lie down on her bed, nor
should she lie or sit where they slept. Sometimes a widow
would wear a breech-cloth made of dry bunch-grass for
several days to prevent her husband's ghost from having
intercourse with her.<note place='foot'>J. Teit, <q>The Thompson Indians of
British Columbia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Memoir of the American
Museum of Natural History, The
Jesup North Pacific Expedition</hi>, vol. i.
part iv. (April 1900) pp. 331, 332 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among the Tinneh or Déné Indians
of North-West America all who have handled a corpse are
subject to many restrictions and taboos. They are debarred
for a certain period from eating any fresh meat: they may
never use a knife to cut their food but must tear it with
their teeth: they may not drink out of a vessel in common
use, but must employ a gourd which they carry about for
the purpose; and they wear peeled willow wands about
their arms and necks or carry them in their hands as
disinfectants to annul the evil consequences which are
supposed to follow from handling the dead.<note place='foot'>C. Hill-Tout, <hi rend='italic'>The Far West, the
Home of the Salish and Déné</hi> (London,
1907), pp. 193 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among the
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
Indian tribes of Queen Charlotte Sound a widow or
widower goes into special mourning for a month; among
the Koskimos the period of mourning is four months.
During this time he or she lives apart in a very small hut
behind the house, eating and drinking alone, and using for
that purpose dishes which are not employed by other
members of the tribe.<note place='foot'>G. M. Dawson, <q>Notes and Observations
on the Kwakiool People of
the Northern part of Vancouver Island
and adjacent Coasts,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings and
Transactions of the Royal Society of
Canada for the Year 1887</hi>, vol. v.
(Montreal, 1888) Trans. Section ii.
pp. 78 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Seclusion
of widows
and
widowers
in the
Philippines
and New
Guinea.</note>
Among the Agutainos, who inhabit Palawan, one of the
Philippine Islands, a widow may not leave her hut for seven
or eight days after the death; and even then she may only
go out at an hour when she is not likely to meet anybody,
for whoever looks upon her dies a sudden death. To prevent
this fatal catastrophe, the widow knocks with a wooden peg
on the trees as she goes along, thus warning people of her
dangerous proximity; and the very trees on which she
knocks soon die.<note place='foot'>F. Blumentritt, <q>Über die Eingeborenen
der Insel Palawan und der
Inselgruppe der Talamlanen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>,
lix. (1891) p. 182.</note> So poisonous is the atmosphere of death
that surrounds those to whom the ghost of the departed
may be thought to cleave. In the Mekeo district of British
New Guinea a widower loses all his civil rights and becomes
a social outcast, an object of fear and horror, shunned by all.
He may not cultivate a garden, nor shew himself in public,
nor traverse the village, nor walk on the roads and paths.
Like a wild beast he must skulk in the long grass and the
bushes; and if he sees or hears any one coming, especially
a woman, he must hide behind a tree or a thicket. If he
wishes to fish or hunt, he must do it alone and at night. If
he would consult any one, even the missionary, he does so
by stealth and at night; he seems to have lost his voice and
speaks only in whispers. Were he to join a party of fishers
or hunters, his presence would bring misfortune on them;
the ghost of his dead wife would frighten away the fish or
the game. He goes about everywhere and at all times
armed with a tomahawk to defend himself, not only against
wild boars in the jungle, but against the dreaded spirit of
his departed spouse, who would do him an ill turn if she
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
could; for all the souls of the dead are malignant and their
only delight is to harm the living.<note place='foot'>Father Guis, <q>Les Canaques,
Mort-Deuil,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Missions Catholiques</hi>,
xxxiv. (1902) pp. 208 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='3. Women tabooed at Menstruation and Childbirth.'/>
<head>§ 3. Women tabooed at Menstruation and Childbirth.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Taboos
imposed on
women at
menstruation.</note>
In general, we may say that the prohibition to use the
vessels, garments, and so on of certain persons, and the effects
supposed to follow an infraction of the rule, are exactly the
same whether the persons to whom the things belong are
sacred or what we might call unclean and polluted. As the
garments which have been touched by a sacred chief kill
those who handle them, so do the things which have been
touched by a menstruous woman. An Australian blackfellow,
who discovered that his wife had lain on his blanket
at her menstrual period, killed her and died of terror himself
within a fortnight.<note place='foot'>Capt. W. E. Armit, <q>Customs of
the Australian Aborigines,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Anthropological Institute</hi>, ix. (1880)
p. 459.</note> Hence Australian women at these times
are forbidden under pain of death to touch anything that
men use, or even to walk on a path that any man frequents.
They are also secluded at childbirth, and all vessels used by
them during their seclusion are burned.<note place='foot'>W. Ridley, <q>Report on Australian
Languages and Traditions,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
ii. (1873) p. 268.</note> In Uganda the
pots which a woman touches while the impurity of childbirth
or of menstruation is on her should be destroyed; spears
and shields defiled by her touch are not destroyed but only
purified.<note place='foot'>From information given me by
Messrs. Roscoe and Miller, missionaries
to Uganda (June 24, 1897), and
afterwards corrected by the <foreign rend='italic'>Katikiro</foreign>
(Prime Minister) of Uganda in conversation
with Mr. Roscoe (June 20, 1902).</note> No Esquimaux of Alaska will willingly drink out
of the same cup or eat out of the same dish that has been
used by a woman at her confinement until it has been purified
by certain incantations.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Report of the International Polar
Expedition to Point Barrow, Alaska</hi>
(Washington, 1885), p. 46.</note> Amongst some of the Indians of
North America, women at menstruation are forbidden to
touch men's utensils, which would be so defiled by their
touch that their subsequent use would be attended by certain
mischief or misfortune.<note place='foot'>Alexander Mackenzie, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages
from Montreal through the Continent
of North America</hi> (London, 1801),
p. cxxiii.</note> For instance, in some of the Tinneh
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
or Déné tribes girls verging on maturity take care that the
dishes out of which they eat are used by no one else. When
their first periodical sickness comes on, they are fed by their
mothers or nearest kinswomen, and will on no account touch
their food with their own hands. At the same time they
abstain from touching their heads with their hands, and keep
a small stick to scratch their heads with when they itch.
They remain outside the house in a hut built for the purpose,
and wear a skull-cap made of skin to fit very tight, which
they never lay aside till the first monthly infirmity is over.
A fringe of shells, bones, and so on hangs down from their
forehead so as to cover their eyes, lest any malicious sorcerer
should harm them during this critical period.<note place='foot'>Gavin Hamilton, <q>Customs of the
New Caledonian Women,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Anthropological Institute</hi>, vii. (1878)
p. 206. Among the Nootkas of British
Columbia a girl at puberty is hidden
from the sight of men for several days
behind a partition of mats; during her
seclusion she may not scratch her head
or her body with her hands, but she
may do so with a comb or a piece of
bone, which is provided for the purpose.
See Fr. Boas, in <hi rend='italic'>Sixth Report on the
North-Western Tribes of Canada</hi>, p. 41
(separate reprint from the <hi rend='italic'>Report of
the British Association for 1890</hi>).
Again, among the Shuswap of British
Columbia a girl at puberty lives alone
in a little hut on the mountains and is
forbidden to touch her head or scratch
her body; but she may scratch her
head with a three-toothed comb and her
body with the painted bone of a deer.
See Fr. Boas, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 89 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> In the
East Indian island of Ceram a girl may
not scratch herself with her fingers the
night before her teeth are filed, but she
may do it with a piece of bamboo. See
J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik- en kroesharige
rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</hi>,
p. 137.</note> <q>Among all
the Déné and most other American tribes, hardly any other
being was the object of so much dread as a menstruating
woman. As soon as signs of that condition made themselves
apparent in a young girl she was carefully segregated
from all but female company, and had to live by herself in a
small hut away from the gaze of the villagers or of the male
members of the roving band. While in that awful state, she
had to abstain from touching anything belonging to man, or
the spoils of any venison or other animal, lest she would
thereby pollute the same, and condemn the hunters to
failure, owing to the anger of the game thus slighted. Dried
fish formed her diet, and cold water, absorbed through a
drinking tube, was her only beverage. Moreover, as the
very sight of her was dangerous to society, a special skin
bonnet, with fringes falling over her face down to her
breast, hid her from the public gaze, even some time
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
after she had recovered her normal state.</q><note place='foot'>A. G. Morice, <q>The Canadian
Dénés,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Annual Archaeological Report
(Toronto), 1905</hi>, p. 218.</note> Among the
Bribri Indians of Costa Rica a menstruous woman is
regarded as unclean (<foreign rend='italic'>bukuru</foreign>). The only plates she may
use for her food are banana leaves, which, when she has
done with them, she throws away in some sequestered
spot; for were a cow to find them and eat them, the animal
would waste away and perish. And she drinks out of a
special vessel for a like reason; because if any one drank
out of the same cup after her, he would surely die.<note place='foot'>H. Pittier de Fabrega, <q>Die
Sprache der Bribri-Indianer in Costa
Rica,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Sitzungsberichte der philosophischen-historischen
Classe der Kaiserlichen
Akademie der Wissenschaften</hi>
(Vienna), cxxxviii. (1898) p. 20.</note> In
the islands of Mabuiag and Saibai, in Torres Straits, girls
at their first menstruation are strictly secluded from the
sight of men. In Mabuiag the seclusion lasts three months,
in Saibai about a fortnight. During the time of her separation
the girl is forbidden to feed herself or to handle food,
which is put into her mouth by women or girls told off to
wait on her.<note place='foot'>C. G. Seligmann, in <hi rend='italic'>Reports of
the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition
to Torres Straits</hi>, v. (Cambridge,
1904) pp. 201, 203.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Taboos
imposed
on women
in childbed.</note>
Among many peoples similar restrictions are imposed
on women in childbed and apparently for similar reasons;
at such periods women are supposed to be in a dangerous
condition which would infect any person or thing they
might touch; hence they are put into quarantine until, with
the recovery of their health and strength, the imaginary
danger has passed away. Thus, in Tahiti a woman after
childbirth was secluded for a fortnight or three weeks in
a temporary hut erected on sacred ground; during the
time of her seclusion she was debarred from touching provisions,
and had to be fed by another. Further, if any
one else touched the child at this period, he was subjected
to the same restrictions as the mother until the ceremony of
her purification had been performed.<note place='foot'>James Wilson, <hi rend='italic'>Missionary Voyage
to the Southern Pacific Ocean</hi>, p. 354.</note> Similarly in Manahiki,
an island of the Southern Pacific, for ten days after her
delivery a woman was not allowed to handle food, and had
to be fed by some other person.<note place='foot'>G. Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi>, p. 276.</note> In the Sinaugolo tribe of
British New Guinea, for about a month after her confinement
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
a woman may not prepare or handle food; she may not
even cook for herself, and when she is eating the food
made ready for her by her friends she must use a
sharpened stick to transfer it to her mouth.<note place='foot'>C. G. Seligmann, <q>The Medicine,
Surgery, and Midwifery of the Sinaugolo,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxxii. (1902) p. 302. In
Uganda a bride is secluded for a month,
during which she only receives near
relatives; she wears her veil all this
time. She may not handle food, but
is fed by one of her attendants. A
peasant's wife is secluded for two or
three days only. See J. Roscoe,
<q>Further Notes on the Manners and
Customs of the Baganda,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxii.
(1902) p. 37.</note> Similarly
in the Roro and Mekeo districts of British New Guinea a
woman after childbirth becomes for a time taboo (<foreign rend='italic'>opu</foreign>),
and any person or thing she may chance to touch
becomes taboo also. Accordingly during this time she
abstains from cooking; for were she to cook food, not only
the victuals themselves but the pot and the fire would be
tabooed, so that nobody could eat the victuals, or use the
pot, or warm himself at the fire. Further at meals she may
not dip her hand into the dish and help herself, as the
natives commonly do; she must use for the purpose a long
fork, with which she takes up the bananas, sweet potatoes,
yams, and so forth, in order not to contaminate the rest of
the food in the vessel by the touch of her fingers. If she
wishes to drink, a gourd is set before her, and wrapping up
her hands in a cloth or coco-nut fibre she pours the water
into a small calabash for her use; or she may pour the water
directly into her mouth without letting the gourd touch her
lips. If anything has to be handed to her, it is not given
from hand to hand but reached to her at the end of a long
stick.<note place='foot'>Father Guis, <q>Les Canaques, ce
qu'ils font, ce qu'ils disent,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Missions
Catholiques</hi>, xxx. (1898) p. 119.</note> Similarly in the island of Kadiak, off Alaska, a
woman about to be delivered retires to a miserable low
hovel built of reeds, where she must remain for twenty days
after the birth of her child, whatever the season may be, and
she is considered so unclean that no one will touch her, and
food is reached to her on sticks.<note place='foot'>V. Lisiansky, <hi rend='italic'>A Voyage Round the
World</hi> (London, 1814), p. 201.</note> In the Ba-Pedi and Ba-Thonga
tribes of South Africa a woman in childbed may
not touch her food with her hands all the time of her
seclusion; she must eat with the help of a wooden spoon.
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
They think that if she touched her victuals she might infect
them with her bloody flux, and that having partaken of such
tainted food she would fall into a consumption.<note place='foot'>H. A. Junod, <q>Les Conceptions
physiologiques des Bantou sud-africains
et leurs tabous,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue d' Ethnographie
et de Sociologie</hi>, i. (1910) p. 153.</note> The Bribri
Indians regard the pollution of childbed as much more dangerous
even than that of menstruation. When a woman feels her
time approaching, she informs her husband, who makes haste
to build a hut for her in a lonely spot. There she must live
alone, holding no converse with anybody save her mother
or another woman. After her delivery the medicine-man
purifies her by breathing on her and laying an animal, it
matters not what, upon her. But even this ceremony only
mitigates her uncleanness into a state considered to be
equivalent to that of a menstruous woman; and for a full
lunar month she must live apart from her housemates,
observing the same rules with regard to eating and drinking
as at her monthly periods. The case is still worse, the
pollution is still more deadly, if she has had a miscarriage or
has been delivered of a stillborn child. In that case she
may not go near a living soul: the mere contact with things
she has used is exceedingly dangerous: her food is handed
to her at the end of a long stick. This lasts generally for
three weeks, after which she may go home subject only
to the restrictions incident to an ordinary confinement.<note place='foot'>H. Pittier de Fábrega, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
pp. 20 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Among the Adivi or forest Gollas of Southern India, when
a woman feels the first pains of labour, she is turned clean
out of the village and must take up her quarters in a little
hut made of leaves or mats about two hundred yards
away. In this hut she must bring forth her offspring
unaided, unless a midwife can be fetched in time to be with
her before the child is born; if the midwife arrives after the
birth has taken place she may not go near the woman. For
ninety days the mother lives in the hut by herself. If any
one touches her, he or she becomes, like the mother herself,
an outcast and is expelled from the village for three months,
The woman's husband generally makes a little hut about
fifty yards from hers and stays in it sometimes to watch
over her, but he may not go near her on pain of being an
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
outcast for three months. Food is placed on the ground
near the woman's hut and she takes it. On the fourth day
after the birth a woman of the village goes to her and pours
water on her, but may not come into contact with her.
On the fifth day the villagers clear away the stones and
thorny bushes from a patch of ground about ten yards on
the village side of the hut, and to this clearing the woman
removes her hut unaided; no one may help her to do so.
On the ninth, fifteenth, and thirtieth days she again shifts
her hut nearer and nearer to the village; and again once in
each of the two following months she brings her hut still
nearer. On the ninetieth day of her seclusion the woman
is called out from her hut, washed, clad in clean clothes, and
after being taken to the village temple is conducted to her own
house by a man of the caste, who performs purificatory
ceremonies.<note place='foot'>F. Fawcett, <q>Note on a Custom
of the Mysore <q>Gollaválu</q> or Shepherd
Caste People,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Society of Bombay</hi>, i. 536 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
E. Thurston, <hi rend='italic'>Castes and Tribes of
Southern India</hi> (Madras, 1909), ii.
287 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dangers
apprehended
from
women in
childbed.</note>
These customs shew that in the opinion of some primitive
peoples a woman at and after childbirth is pervaded by a
certain dangerous influence which can infect anything and
anybody she touches; so that in the interest of the community
it becomes necessary to seclude her from society
for a while until the virulence of the infection has passed
away, when, after submitting to certain rites of purification,
she is again free to mingle with her fellows. This dread of
lying-in women appears to be widespread, for the practice
of shutting them up at such times in lonely huts away from
the rest of the people is very common. Sometimes the
nature of the danger which is apprehended from them is
explicitly stated. Thus in the island of Tumleo, off German
New Guinea, after the birth of her first child a woman is
shut up with her infant for five to eight days, during which
no man, not even her husband, may see her; for the men
think that were they to see her, their bodies would swell up
and they would die.<note place='foot'>M. J. Erdweg, <q>Die Bewohner
der Insel Tumleo, Berlinhafen, Deutsch
Neu-Guinea,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen der Anthropologischen
Gesellschaft in Wien</hi>,
xxxii. (1902) p. 280.</note> Apparently their notion is that the
sight of a woman who has just been big with child will, on
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
the principles of homoeopathic magic, make their bodies big
also to bursting. The Sulka of New Britain imagine that,
when a woman has been delivered of a child, the men
become cowardly, weapons lose their force, and the slips
which are to be planted out are deprived of their power of
germinating. Hence they perform a ceremony which is
intended to counteract this mysterious influence on men and
plants. As soon as it is known that a woman has been
brought to bed, all the male population of the village
assembles in the men's clubhouse. Branches of a strong-smelling
tree are fetched, the twigs are broken off, the leaves
stripped off and put on the fire. All the men present then
seize branches with young buds. One of them holds ginger
in his hand, which, after reciting a spell over it, he distributes
to the others. They chew it and spit it out on the twigs,
and these twigs are afterwards laid on the shields and other
weapons in the house, and also on the slips which are to be
planted; moreover they are fastened on the roofs and over
the doorways of the houses. In this way they seek to annul
the noxious infection of childbirth.<note place='foot'>P. Rascher, <q>Die Sulka,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Archiv
für Anthropologie</hi>, xxix. (1904) p.
212; R. Parkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Dreissig Jahre
in der Südsee</hi> (Stuttgart, 1907), p.
180.</note> Among the Yabim of
German New Guinea, when a birth has taken place in the
village, all the inhabitants remain at home next morning
<q>in order that the fruits of the field may not be spoiled.</q><note place='foot'>K. Vetter, in <hi rend='italic'>Nachrichten über
Kaiser Wilhelms-Land und den Bismarck-Archipel</hi>,
1897, p. 87.</note>
Apparently they fear that if they went out to their fields
and gardens immediately after a woman had been brought
to bed, they would carry with them a dangerous contagion
which might blight the crops. When a Herero woman has
given birth to a child, her female companions hastily construct
a special hut for her to which she is transferred. Both
the hut and the woman are sacred and <q>for this reason, the
men are not allowed to see the lying-in woman until the
navel string has separated from the child, otherwise they
would become weaklings, and when later they <foreign rend='italic'>yumbana</foreign>, that
is, go to war with spear and bow, they would be shot.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. E. Dannert, <q>Customs of
the Ovaherero at the Birth of a Child,</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>South African</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Journal</hi>, ii.
(1880) p. 63.</note>
Thus the Herero like the Sulka appear to imagine that the
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
weakness of a lying-in woman can, on the principles of
homoeopathic magic, infect any men who may chance to
see her.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dangers
apprehended
from
women in
childbed
by Indians
and Esquimaux.</note>
Among the Saragacos Indians of eastern Ecuador, as
soon as a woman feels the travail-pangs beginning, she
retires into the forest to a distance of three or four leagues
from her home, where she takes up her abode in a hut of
leaves which has been already prepared for her. <q>This
banishment,</q> we are told, <q>is the fruit of the superstition
of these Indians, who are persuaded that the spirit of evil
would attach himself to their house if the women were
brought to bed in it.</q><note place='foot'>Levrault, <q>Rapport sur les provinces
de Canélos et du Napo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin
de la Société de Géographie</hi> (Paris),
Deuxième Série, xi. (1839) p. 74.</note> The Esquimaux of Baffin Land
think that the body of a lying-in woman exhales a vapour
which would adhere to the souls of seals if she ate the flesh
of any seals except such as have been caught by her
husband, by a boy, or by an aged man. <q>Cases of premature
birth require particularly careful treatment. The event
must be announced publicly, else dire results will follow. If
a woman should conceal from the other people that she has
had a premature birth, they might come near her, or even
eat in her hut of the seals procured by her husband. The
vapor arising from her would thus affect them, and they
would be avoided by the seals. The transgression would
also become attached to the soul of the seal, which would
take it down to Sedna,</q> the mythical mother of the sea-mammals,
who lives in the lower world and controls the
destinies of mankind.<note place='foot'>Franz Boas, <q>The Eskimo of
Baffin Land and Hudson Bay,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin
of the American Museum of Natural
History</hi>, xv. part i. (New York, 1901)
pp. 125 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> As to Sedna, see <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> pp.
119 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dangers
apprehended
from
women in
childbed
by Bantu
tribes of
South
Africa. Dangers
apprehended
from a
concealed
miscarriage.</note>
Some Bantu tribes of South Africa entertain even more
exaggerated notions of the virulent infection spread by a
woman who has had a miscarriage and has concealed it.
An experienced observer of these people tells us that the
blood of childbirth <q>appears to the eyes of the South
Africans to be tainted with a pollution still more dangerous
than that of the menstrual fluid. The husband is excluded
from the hut for eight days of the lying-in period, chiefly
from fear that he might be contaminated by this secretion.
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
He dare not take his child in his arms for the three first
months after the birth. But the secretion of childbed is
particularly terrible when it is the product of a miscarriage,
especially <emph>a concealed miscarriage</emph>. In this case it is not
merely the man who is threatened or killed, it is the whole
country, it is the sky itself which suffers. By a curious
association of ideas a physiological fact causes cosmic
troubles!</q><note place='foot'>H. A. Junod, <q>Les Conceptions
physiologiques des Bantou sud-africains
et leurs tabous,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue d'Ethnographie
et de Sociologie</hi>, i. (1910) p. 139.</note> Thus, for example, the Ba-Pedi believe that a
woman who has procured abortion can kill a man merely by
lying with him; her victim is poisoned, shrivels up, and
dies within a week. As for the disastrous effect which a
miscarriage may have on the whole country I will quote the
words of a medicine-man and rain-maker of the Ba-Pedi
tribe: <q>When a woman has had a miscarriage, when she
has allowed her blood to flow, and has hidden the child, it
is enough to cause the burning winds to blow and to parch
the country with heat. The rain no longer falls, for the
country is no longer in order. When the rain approaches
the place where the blood is, it will not dare to approach.
It will fear and remain at a distance. That woman has
committed a great fault. She has spoiled the country of
the chief, for she has hidden blood which had not yet been
well congealed to fashion a man. That blood is taboo
(<foreign rend='italic'>yila</foreign>). It should never drip on the road! The chief will
assemble his men and say to them, <q>Are you in order in your
villages?</q> Some one will answer, <q>Such and such a woman
was pregnant and we have not yet seen the child which she
has given birth to.</q> Then they go and arrest the woman.
They say to her, <q>Shew us where you have hidden it.</q> They
go and dig at the spot, they sprinkle the hole with a
decoction of <foreign rend='italic'>mbendoula</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>nyangale</foreign> (two sorts of roots)
prepared in a special pot. They take a little of the earth
of this grave, they throw it into the river, then they bring
back water from the river and sprinkle it where she shed her
blood. She herself must wash every day with the medicine.
Then the country will be moistened again (by rain).
Further, we (medicine-men) summon the women of the
country; we tell them to prepare a ball of the earth which
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
contains the blood. They bring it to us one morning. If
we wish to prepare medicine with which to sprinkle the
whole country, we crumble this earth to powder; at the end
of five days we send little boys and little girls, girls that yet
know nothing of women's affairs and have not yet had
relations with men. We put the medicine in the horns of
oxen, and these children go to all the fords, to all the
entrances of the country. A little girl turns up the soil
with her mattock, the others dip a branch in the horn and
sprinkle the inside of the hole saying, <q>Rain! rain!</q> So
we remove the misfortune which the women have brought
on the roads; the rain will be able to come. The country
is purified!</q><note place='foot'>H. A. Junod, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 139 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Belief of
the Ba-Thonga
that severe
droughts
result from
the concealment
of miscarriages
by women.</note>
Similarly the Ba-Thonga, another Bantu tribe of South
Africa in the valley of the Limpopo river, attribute severe
droughts to the concealment of miscarriages by women,
and they perform the following rites to remove the pollution
and procure rain. A small clearing is made in a
thick and thorny wood, and here a pot is buried in the
ground so that its mouth is flush with the surface. From
the pot four channels run in the form of a cross to the four
cardinal points of the horizon. Then a black ox or a
black ram, without a speck of white on it, is killed and the
pot is stuffed with the half-digested grass found in the
animal's stomach. Next, little girls, still in the age of
innocence, are sent to draw water, which they pour into the
pot till it overflows into the four channels. After that the
women assemble, strip off their clothes, and covering their
nakedness only with a scanty petticoat of grass they dance,
leap, and sing, <q>Rain, fall!</q> Then they go and dig up the
remains of the prematurely born infants and of twins buried
in dry ground on a hill. These they collect in one place.
No man may approach the spot. The women would beat
any male who might be so indiscreet as to intrude on their
privacy, and they would put riddles to him which he would
have to answer in the most filthy language borrowed from
the circumcision ceremonies; for obscene words, which are
usually forbidden, are customary and legitimate on these
occasions. The women pour water on the graves of the
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
infants and of twins in order to <q>extinguish</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>timula</foreign>) them,
as the natives phrase it; which seems to imply that the
graves are thought to be the source of the scorching heat
which is blasting the country. At the fall of evening they
bury all the remains they have discovered, poking them
away in the mud near a stream. Then the rain will be free
to fall.<note place='foot'>H. A. Junod, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 140 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In these ceremonies the pouring of water into
channels which run in the direction of the four quarters of the
heaven is clearly a charm based on the principles of homoeopathic
magic to procure rain. The supposed influence of
twins over the waters of heaven and the use of foul language
at rain-making ceremonies have been illustrated in another
part of this work.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, vol. i. pp. 262 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 278.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dangers
apprehended
from
women in
childbed
by some
tribes of
Annam.</note>
Among the natives of the Nguôn So'n valley in Annam,
during the first month after a woman has been delivered of
a child, all the persons of the house are supposed to be
affected with an evil destiny or ill luck called <foreign rend='italic'>phong long</foreign>.
If a member of such a household enters another house, the
inmates never fail to say to him, <q>You bring me the <foreign rend='italic'>phong
long</foreign>!</q> Should a member of a family in which somebody
is seriously ill have to enter a house infected by the <foreign rend='italic'>phong
long</foreign>, on returning home he always fumigates himself with
tea leaves or some other plant in order to rid himself of the
infection which he has contracted; for they fear that the
blood of the woman who has been brought to bed may harm
the patient. All the time a house is tainted with the <foreign rend='italic'>phong
long</foreign>, a branch of cactus (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Euphorbia antiquorum</foreign>) or pandanus
is hung at the door. The same thing is done to a house
infected by small-pox: it is a danger signal to warn
people off. The <foreign rend='italic'>phong long</foreign> only disappears when the woman
has gone to market for the first time after her delivery.<note place='foot'>Le R. P. Cadière, <q>Coutumes
populaires de la vallée du Nguôn-So'n,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de l'École Française
d'Extrême-Orient</hi>, ii. (Hanoi, 1902)
pp. 353 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> A
trace of a similar belief in the dangerous infection of childbirth
may be seen in the rule of ancient Greek religion,
which forbade persons who had handled a corpse or been in
contact with a lying-in woman to enter a temple or approach
an altar for a certain time, sometimes for two days.<note place='foot'><p>Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 566; Ch. Michel,
<hi rend='italic'>Recueil d'inscriptions grecques</hi>, No.
730 ἁγνευέτωσαν δὲ καὶ εἰσίτωσαν εἰς
τὸν τῆς θεο[ῦ ναὸν] ... ὡσαύτως δὲ καὶ
ἀπὸ κήδους καὶ τεκούσης γυναικὸς δευτεραῖος:
Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Iphigenia in Tauris</hi>,
380 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>:
</p>
<p>
τὰ τῆς θεοῦ δὲ μέμφομαι σοφίσματα,
ἤτις. βροτῶν μὲν ἤν τις ἄψηται φόνου
ἥ καὶ λοχείας ἢ νεκροῦ θιγῇ χεροῖν,
βωμῶν ἀπείργει, μυσαρὸν ὡς ἡγουμένη.
</p>
<p>
Compare also a mutilated Greek inscription
found in Egypt (<hi rend='italic'>Revue archéologique</hi>,
IIIme Série, ii. 182 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>).
In the passage of Euripides which I
have just quoted an acute verbal
scholar, the late Dr. Badham, proposed
to omit the line ἢ καὶ λοχείας ἢ νεκροῦ
θιγῇ χεροῖν with the comment: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nihil
facit ad argumentum puerperae mentio;
patet versum a sciolo additum</foreign>.</q> To
do Dr. Badham justice, the inscription
which furnishes so close a parallel to
the line of Euripides had not yet
been discovered among the ruins of
Pergamum, when he proposed to mutilate
the text of the poet.</p></note>
</p>

<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Taboos
imposed
on lads at
initiation.</note>
Restrictions and taboos like those laid on menstruous
and lying-in women are imposed by some savages on lads
at the initiatory rites which celebrate the attainment of
puberty; hence we may infer that at such times young
men are supposed to be in a state like that of women at
menstruation and in childbed. Thus, among the Creek
Indians a lad at initiation had to abstain for twelve moons
from picking his ears or scratching his head with his
fingers; he had to use a small stick for these purposes.
For four moons he must have a fire of his own to cook
his food at; and a little girl, a virgin, might cook for him.
During the fifth moon any person might cook for him, but
he must serve himself first, and use one spoon and pan.
On the fifth day of the twelfth moon he gathered corn
cobs, burned them to ashes, and with the ashes rubbed his
body all over. At the end of the twelfth moon he sweated
under blankets, and then bathed in water, which ended the
ceremony. While the ceremonies lasted, he might touch no
one but lads who were undergoing a like course of initiation.<note place='foot'>B. Hawkins, <q>The Creek Confederacy,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Collections of the Georgia
Historical Society</hi>, iii. pt. i. (Savannah,
1848) pp. 78 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Hawkins's account is
reproduced by A. S. Gatschett, in his
<hi rend='italic'>Migration Legend of the Creek Indians</hi>,
i. 185 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (Philadelphia, 1884). In
the Turrbal tribe of southern Queensland
boys at initiation were not allowed
to scratch themselves with their fingers,
but they might do it with a stick. See
A. W. Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South-East
Australia</hi>, p. 596.</note>
Caffre boys at circumcision live secluded in a special hut; they
are smeared from head to foot with white clay; they wear tall
head-dresses with horn-like projections and short skirts like
those of ballet-dancers. When their wounds are healed, all the
vessels which they had used during their seclusion and the
boyish mantles which they had hitherto worn are burned,
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
together with the hut, and the boys rush away from the
burning hut without looking back, <q>lest a fearful curse
should cling to them.</q> After that they are bathed,
anointed, and clad in new garments.<note place='foot'>L. Alberti, <hi rend='italic'>De Kaffers</hi> (Amsterdam,
1810), pp. 76 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; H. Lichtenstein,
<hi rend='italic'>Reisen im südlichen Afrika</hi>
(Berlin, 1811-12), i. 427; S. Kay,
<hi rend='italic'>Travels and Researches in Caffraria</hi>
(London, 1833), pp. 273 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Dudley
Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>The Essential Kafir</hi>, p. 208;
J. Stewart, D.D., <hi rend='italic'>Lovedale, South
Africa</hi> (Edinburgh, 1894), pp. 105 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
with illustrations.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='4. Warriors tabooed.'/>
<head>§ 4. Warriors tabooed.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Taboos
laid on
warriors
when they
go forth to
fight.</note>
Once more, warriors are conceived by the savage to
move, so to say, in an atmosphere of spiritual danger which
constrains them to practise a variety of superstitious observances
quite different in their nature from those rational
precautions which, as a matter of course, they adopt against
foes of flesh and blood. The general effect of these observances
is to place the warrior, both before and after victory,
in the same state of seclusion or spiritual quarantine in
which, for his own safety, primitive man puts his human
gods and other dangerous characters. Thus when the
Maoris went out on the war-path they were sacred or taboo
in the highest degree, and they and their friends at home
had to observe strictly many curious customs over and above
the numerous taboos of ordinary life. They became, in the
irreverent language of Europeans who knew them in the
old fighting days, <q>tabooed an inch thick</q>; and as for the
leader of the expedition, he was quite unapproachable.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Old New Zealand</hi>, by a Pakeha
Maori (London, 1884), pp. 96, 114 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
One of the customs mentioned by the
writer was that all the people left in
the camp had to fast strictly while the
warriors were out in the field. This rule
is obviously based on the sympathetic
connexion supposed to exist between
friends at a distance, especially at
critical times. See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art
and the Evolution of Kings</hi>, vol. i.
pp. 126 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
Similarly, when the Israelites marched forth to war they
were bound by certain rules of ceremonial purity identical
with rules observed by Maoris and Australian blackfellows
on the war-path. The vessels they used were
sacred, and they had to practise continence and a custom of
personal cleanliness of which the original motive, if we may
judge from the avowed motive of savages who conform to
the same custom, was a fear lest the enemy should obtain
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
the refuse of their persons, and thus be enabled to work
their destruction by magic.<note place='foot'><p>Deuteronomy xxiii. 9-14; 1
Samuel xxi. 5. The rule laid down
in Deuteronomy xxiii. 10, 11, suffices
to prove that the custom of continence
observed in time of war by the
Israelites, as by a multitude of savage
and barbarous peoples, was based on a
superstitious, not a rational motive. To
convince us of this it is enough to remark
that the rule is often observed by warriors
for some time after their victorious
return, and also by the persons left at
home during the absence of the fighting
men. In these cases the observance
of the rule evidently does not
admit of a rational explanation, which
could hardly, indeed, be entertained by
any one conversant with savage modes
of thought. For examples, see <hi rend='italic'>The
Magic Art and the Evolution of
Kings</hi>, vol. i. pp. 125, 128, 131, 133,
and below, pp. 161, 163, 165, 166,
167, 168, 169, 175 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 178, 179, 181.
</p>
<p>
The other rule of personal cleanliness
referred to in the text is exactly
observed, for the reason I have
indicated, by the aborigines in various
parts of Australia. See (Sir) George
Grey, <hi rend='italic'>Journals</hi>, ii. 344; R. Brough
Smyth, <hi rend='italic'>Aborigines of Victoria</hi>, i. 165;
J. Dawson, <hi rend='italic'>Australian Aborigines</hi>, p.
12; P. Beveridge, in <hi rend='italic'>Journal and Proceedings
of the Royal Society of New
South Wales</hi>, xvii. (1883) pp. 69 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
Compare W. Stanbridge, <q>On the
Aborigines of Victoria,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transactions
of the Ethnological Society of London</hi>,
N.S. i. (1861) p. 299; Fison and
Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>Kamilaroi and Kurnai</hi>, p. 251;
E. M. Curr, <hi rend='italic'>The Australian Race</hi>, iii.
178 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 547; W. E. Roth, <hi rend='italic'>North
Queensland Ethnography, Bulletin No.
5</hi> (Brisbane, 1903), p. 22, § 80. The
same dread has resulted in a similar
custom of cleanliness in Melanesia and
Africa. See R. Parkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Im Bismarck-Archipel</hi>,
pp. 143 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; R. H.
Codrington, <hi rend='italic'>The Melanesians</hi>, p. 203
note; F. von Luschan, <q>Einiges über
Sitten und Gebräuche der Eingeborenen
Neu-Guineas,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen
der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie,
Ethnologie, und Urgeschichte</hi>
(1900), p. 416; J. Macdonald,
<q>Manners, Customs, Superstitions,
and Religions of South African Tribes,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xx. (1891) p. 131. Mr. Lorimer
Fison sent me some notes on the
Fijian practice, which agrees with the
one described by Dr. Codrington. The
same rule is observed, probably from
the same motives, by the Miranha
Indians of Brazil. See Spix und
Martius, <hi rend='italic'>Reise in Brasilien</hi>, iii. 1251
note. On this subject compare F.
Schwally, <hi rend='italic'>Semitische Kriegsaltertümer</hi>,
i. (Leipsic, 1901) pp. 67 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></p></note> Among some Indian tribes of
North America a young warrior in his first campaign had to
conform to certain customs, of which two were identical with
the observances imposed by the same Indians on girls at
their first menstruation: the vessels he ate and drank out of
might be touched by no other person, and he was forbidden
to scratch his head or any other part of his body with his
fingers; if he could not help scratching himself, he had to
do it with a stick.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the Captivity and
Adventures of John Tanner</hi> (London,
1830), p. 122.</note> The latter rule, like the one which
forbids a tabooed person to feed himself with his own fingers,
seems to rest on the supposed sanctity or pollution, whichever
we choose to call it, of the tabooed hands.<note place='foot'>We have seen (pp. <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>) that
the same rule is observed by girls at
puberty among some Indian tribes of
British Columbia and by Creek lads at
initiation. It is also observed by
Kwakiutl Indians who have eaten
human flesh (see below, p. <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>). Among
the Blackfoot Indians the man who was
appointed every four years to take
charge of the sacred pipe and other
emblems of their religion might not
scratch his body with his finger-nails,
but carried a sharp stick in his hair
which he used for this purpose. During
the term of his priesthood he had to
fast and practise strict continence.
None but he dare handle the sacred
pipe and emblems (W. W. Warren,
<q>History of the Ojibways,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Collections
of the Minnesota Historical Society</hi>, v.
(1885) pp. 68 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>). In Vedic India
the man who was about to offer the
solemn sacrifice of soma prepared himself
for his duties by a ceremony of
consecration, during which he carried
the horn of a black deer or antelope
wherewith to scratch himself if necessary
(<hi rend='italic'>Satapatha-Brâhmana</hi>, bk. iii. 31, vol.
ii. pp. 33 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> trans. by J. Eggeling; H.
Oldenberg, <hi rend='italic'>Die Religion des Veda</hi>, p.
399). Some of the Peruvian Indians
used to prepare themselves for an important
office by fasting, continence,
and refusing to wash themselves, to
comb their hair, and to put their hands
to their heads; if they wished to scratch
themselves, they must do it with a
stick. See P. J. de Arriaga, <hi rend='italic'>Extirpacion
de la idolatria del Piru</hi> (Lima, 1621),
p. 20. Among the Isistines Indians
of Paraguay mourners refrained from
scratching their heads with their
fingers, believing that to break the rule
would make them bald, no hair growing
on the part of the head which their
fingers had touched. See Guevara,
<q>Historia del Paraguay,</q> in P. de
Angelis's <hi rend='italic'>Coleccion de obras y documentos
relativos a la historia antigua
y moderna de las provincias del Rio de
la Plata</hi>, ii. (Buenos-Aires, 1836) p.
30. Amongst the Macusis of British
Guiana, when a woman has given birth
to a child, the father hangs up his hammock
beside that of his wife and stays
there till the navel-string drops off the
child. During this time the parents
have to observe certain rules, of which
one is that they may not scratch their
heads or bodies with their nails, but
must use for this purpose a piece of
palm-leaf. If they broke this rule,
they think the child would die or be an
invalid all its life. See R. Schomburgk,
<hi rend='italic'>Reisen in Britisch-Guiana</hi>, ii. 314.
Some aborigines of Queensland believe
that if they scratched themselves with
their fingers during a rain-making ceremony,
no rain would fall. See <hi rend='italic'>The
Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</hi>,
vol. i. p. 254. In all these cases,
plainly, the hands are conceived to be
so strongly infected with the venom of
taboo that it is dangerous even for the
owner of the hands to touch himself
with them. The cowboy who herded
the cows of the king of Unyoro had
to live strictly chaste, no one might
touch him, and he might not scratch or
wound himself so as to draw blood.
But it is not said that he was forbidden
to touch himself with his own hands.
See my <hi rend='italic'>Totemism and Exogamy</hi>, ii.
527.</note> Moreover
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
among these Indian tribes the men on the war-path had
always to sleep at night with their faces turned towards
their own country; however uneasy the posture they might
not change it. They might not sit upon the bare ground,
nor wet their feet, nor walk on a beaten path if they could
help it; when they had no choice but to walk on a path,
they sought to counteract the ill effect of doing so by
doctoring their legs with certain medicines or charms which
they carried with them for the purpose. No member of the
party was permitted to step over the legs, hands, or body of
any other member who chanced to be sitting or lying on the
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
ground; and it was equally forbidden to step over his
blanket, gun, tomahawk, or anything that belonged to him.
If this rule was inadvertently broken, it became the duty of
the member whose person or property had been stepped over
to knock the other member down, and it was similarly the
duty of that other to be knocked down peaceably and without
resistance. The vessels out of which the warriors ate
their food were commonly small bowls of wood or birch bark,
with marks to distinguish the two sides; in marching from
home the Indians invariably drank out of one side of the
bowl, and in returning they drank out of the other. When
on their way home they came within a day's march of the
village, they hung up all their bowls on trees, or threw them
away on the prairie,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the Captivity and
Adventures of John Tanner</hi> (London,
1830), p. 123. As to the custom of
not stepping over a person or his
weapons, see the note at the end of
the volume.</note> doubtless to prevent their sanctity or
defilement from being communicated with disastrous effects
to their friends, just as we have seen that the vessels and
clothes of the sacred Mikado, of women at childbirth and
menstruation, of boys at circumcision, and of persons defiled
by contact with the dead are destroyed or laid aside for a
similar reason. The first four times that an Apache Indian
goes out on the war-path, he is bound to refrain from scratching
his head with his fingers and from letting water touch
his lips. Hence he scratches his head with a stick, and
drinks through a hollow reed or cane. Stick and reed are
attached to the warrior's belt and to each other by a leathern
thong.<note place='foot'>J. G. Bourke, <hi rend='italic'>On the Border with
Crook</hi> (New York, 1891), p. 133; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
in <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, ii. (1891) p. 453; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, in
<hi rend='italic'>Ninth Annual Report of the Bureau of
Ethnology</hi> (Washington, 1892), p. 490.</note> The rule not to scratch their heads with their
fingers, but to use a stick for the purpose instead, was
regularly observed by Ojebways on the war-path.<note place='foot'>J. G. Kohl, <hi rend='italic'>Kitschi-Gami</hi>, ii. 168.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremonies
observed
by
American
Indians
before they
went out
on the war-path. Rules
observed
by Indians
on a war-expedition.</note>
For three or four weeks before they went on a warlike
expedition, the Nootka Indians made it an invariable rule to
go into the water five or six times a day, when they washed
and scrubbed themselves from head to foot with bushes intermixed
with briars, so that their bodies and faces were often
entirely covered with blood. During this severe exercise
they continually exclaimed, <q>Good or great God, let me live,
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
not be sick, find the enemy, not fear him, find him asleep,
and kill a great many of them.</q> All this time they had no
intercourse with their women, and for a week before setting
out abstained from feasting and every kind of merriment.
For the last three days they were almost constantly in the
water, scrubbing and lacerating themselves in a terrible
manner. They believed that this hardened their skin, so
that the weapons of the enemy could not pierce them.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the Adventures and
Sufferings of John R. Jewitt</hi> (Middletown,
1820), pp. 148 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Before they went out on the war-path the Arikaras and the
Big Belly Indians (<q><hi rend='italic'>Gros Ventres</hi></q>) <q>observe a rigorous
fast, or rather abstain from every kind of food for four days.
In this interval their imagination is exalted to delirium;
whether it be through bodily weakness or the natural effect
of the warlike plans they cherish, they pretend to have strange
visions. The elders and sages of the tribe, being called upon
to interpret these dreams, draw from them omens more or
less favourable to the success of the enterprise; and their
explanations are received as oracles by which the expedition
will be faithfully regulated. So long as the preparatory fast
continues, the warriors make incisions in their bodies, insert
pieces of wood in the flesh, and having fastened leather
thongs to them cause themselves to be hung from a beam
which is fixed horizontally above an abyss a hundred and
fifty feet deep. Often indeed they cut off one or two fingers
which they offer in sacrifice to the Great Spirit in order that
they may come back laden with scalps.</q><note place='foot'>J. de Smet, in <hi rend='italic'>Annales de la Propagation
de la Foi</hi>, xiv. (1842) pp. 67
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> These customs have doubtless
long passed away, and the Indians
who practised them may well have
suffered the extinction which they did
their best to incur.</note> It is hard to
conceive any course of training which could more effectually
incapacitate men for the business of war than that which
these foolish Indians actually adopted. With regard to
the Creek Indians and kindred tribes we are told they
<q>will not cohabit with women while they are out at war;
they religiously abstain from every kind of intercourse even
with their own wives, for the space of three days and nights
before they go to war, and so after they return home,
because they are to sanctify themselves.</q><note place='foot'>J. Adair, <hi rend='italic'>History of the American
Indians</hi> (London, 1775), p. 163.</note> And as a
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
preparation for attacking the enemy they <q>go to the aforesaid
winter house, and there drink a warm decoction of their
supposed holy consecrated herbs and roots for three days and
nights, sometimes without any other refreshment. This is to
induce the deity to guard and prosper them, amidst their
impending dangers. In the most promising appearance of
things, they are not to take the least nourishment of food,
nor so much as to sit down, during that time of sanctifying
themselves, till after sunset. While on their expedition, they
are not allowed to lean themselves against a tree, though
they may be exceedingly fatigued, after a sharp day's march;
nor must they lie by, a whole day to refresh themselves, or
kill and barbicue deer and bear for their war journey. The
more virtuous they are, they reckon the greater will be their
success against the enemy, by the bountiful smiles of the
deity. To gain that favourite point, some of the aged
warriors narrowly watch the young men who are newly
initiated, lest they should prove irreligious, and prophane the
holy fast, and bring misfortunes on the out-standing camp.
A gentleman of my acquaintance, in his youthful days observed
one of their religious fasts, but under the greatest
suspicion of his virtue in this respect, though he had often
headed them against the common enemy: during their three
days' purification, he was not allowed to go out of the
sanctified ground, without a trusty guard, lest hunger should
have tempted him to violate their old martial law, and by
that means have raised the burning wrath of the holy fire
against the whole camp.</q> <q>Every war captain chuses a
noted warrior, to attend on him and the company. He is
called <foreign rend='italic'>Etissû</foreign>, or <q>the waiter.</q> Everything they eat or drink
during their journey, he gives them out of his hand,
by a rigid abstemious rule,&mdash;though each carries on his
back all his travelling conveniencies, wrapt in a deer
skin, yet they are so bigoted in their religious customs
in war that none, though prompted by sharp hunger or
burning thirst, dares relieve himself. They are contented
with such trifling allowance as the religious waiter distributes
to them, even with a scanty hand. Such a regimen would
be too mortifying to any of the white people, let their opinion
of its violation be ever so dangerous. When I roved the
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
woods in a war party with the Indians, though I carried no
scrip, nor bottle, nor staff, I kept a large hollow cane well
corked at each end, and used to sheer off now and then to
drink, while they suffered greatly by thirst. The constancy
of the savages in mortifying their bodies, to gain the divine
favour, is astonishing, from the very time they beat to arms,
till they return from their campaign. All the while they are
out, they are prohibited by ancient custom, the leaning
against a tree, either sitting or standing; nor are they allowed
to sit in the day-time, under the shade of trees, if it can be
avoided; nor on the ground, during the whole journey, but
on such rocks, stones, or fallen wood, as their ark of war
rests upon. By the attention they invariably pay to those
severe rules of living, they weaken themselves much more
than by the unavoidable fatigues of war; but it is fruitless
to endeavour to dissuade them from those things which they
have by tradition, as the appointed means to move the
deity, to grant them success against the enemy, and a safe
return home.</q><note place='foot'>J. Adair, <hi rend='italic'>History of the American
Indians</hi>, pp. 380-382.</note> <q>An Indian, intending to go to war, will
commence by blacking his face, permitting his hair to grow
long, and neglecting his personal appearance, and also will
frequently fast, sometimes for two or three days together,
and refrain from all intercourse with the other sex. If his
dreams are favorable, he thinks that the Great Spirit will
give him success.</q><note place='foot'>Maj. M. Marston, in Rev. Jedidiah
Morse's <hi rend='italic'>Report to the Secretary of War
of the United States on Indian Affairs</hi>
(New-haven, 1822), Appendix, p. 130.
The account in the text refers especially
to the Sauk, Fox, and Kickapoo
Indians, at the junction of the Rock
and Mississippi rivers.</note> Among the Ba-Pedi and Ba-Thonga
tribes of south Africa not only have the warriors to abstain
from women, but the people left behind in the villages are
also bound to continence; they think that any incontinence
on their part would cause thorns to grow on the ground
traversed by the warriors, and that success would not attend
the expedition.<note place='foot'>H. A. Junod, <q>Les Conceptions
physiologiques des Bantou sud-africains
et leurs tabous,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue d'Ethnographie
et de Sociologie</hi>, i. (1910) p. 149.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The rule of
continence
observed
by savage
warriors is
perhaps
based on a
fear of
infecting
themselves
sympathetically
with
feminine
weakness
and
cowardice.</note>
When we observe what pains these misguided savages
took to unfit themselves for the business of war by abstaining
from food, denying themselves rest, and lacerating
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
their bodies, we shall probably not be disposed to attribute
their practice of continence in war to a rational fear of dissipating
their bodily energies by indulgence in the lusts of
the flesh. On the contrary, we can scarcely doubt that the
motive which impelled them to observe chastity on a campaign
was just as frivolous as the motive which led them simultaneously
to fritter away their strength by severe fasts,
gratuitous fatigue, and voluntary wounds at the very
moment when prudence called most loudly for a precisely
opposite regimen. Why exactly so many savages have
made it a rule to refrain from women in time of war,<note place='foot'>For more evidence of the practice of
continence by warriors, see R. Taylor,
<hi rend='italic'>Te Ika A Maui, or New Zealand and its
Inhabitants</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p. 189; E. Dieffenbach,
<hi rend='italic'>Travels in New Zealand</hi>, ii. 85 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Ch. Wilkes, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the United
States Exploring Expedition</hi>, iii. 78;
J. Chalmers, <q>Toaripi,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxvii.
(1898) p. 332; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Pioneering in New
Guinea</hi>, p. 65; Van Schmidt, <q>Aanteekeningen
nopens de zeden, etc., der
bevolking van de eilanden Saparoea,
Haroekoe, Noessa Laut, etc.,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift
voor Neêrlands Indie</hi>, 1843, deel
ii. p. 507; J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De
sluikharige en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes
en Papua</hi>, p. 223; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Galela und
Tobeloresen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</hi>,
xvii. (1885) p. 68; W. W. Skeat,
<hi rend='italic'>Malay Magic</hi>, p. 524; E. Reclus,
<hi rend='italic'>Nouvelle Géographie universelle</hi>, viii.
126 (compare J. Biddulph, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of
the Hindoo Koosh</hi>, p. 18); N. Isaacs,
<hi rend='italic'>Travels and Adventures in Eastern
Africa</hi>, i. 120; H. Callaway, <hi rend='italic'>Religious
System of the Amazulu</hi>, iv. 437 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>The Essential Kafir</hi>, p.
306; A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsche Expedition
an der Loango-Küste</hi>, i. 203;
H. Cole, <q>Notes on the Wagogo of
German East Africa,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxii. (1902)
p. 317; R. H. Nassau, <hi rend='italic'>Fetichism in
West Africa</hi>, p. 177; H. R. Schoolcraft,
<hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes</hi>, iv. 63; J. Morse,
<hi rend='italic'>Report to the Secretary of War of the
U.S. on Indian Affairs</hi> (New-haven,
1822), pp. 130, 131; H. H. Bancroft,
<hi rend='italic'>Native Races of the Pacific States</hi>, i.
189. On the other hand in Uganda,
before an army set out, the general and
all the chiefs had either to lie with
their wives or to jump over them.
This was supposed to ensure victory
and plenty of booty. See J. Roscoe,
in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxii. (1902) p. 59. And in
Kiwai Island, off British New Guinea,
men had intercourse with their wives
before they went to war, and they drew
omens from it. See J. Chalmers, <q>Notes
on the Natives of Kiwai,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxiii.
(1903) p. 123.</note> we
cannot say for certain, but we may conjecture that their
motive was a superstitious fear lest, on the principles of
sympathetic magic, close contact with women should infect
them with feminine weakness and cowardice. Similarly some
savages imagine that contact with a woman in childbed
enervates warriors and enfeebles their weapons.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Indeed the
Kayans of central Borneo go so far as to hold that to touch
a loom or women's clothes would so weaken a man that he
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
would have no success in hunting, fishing, and war.<note place='foot'>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>Quer durch
Borneo</hi>, i. 350.</note> Hence
it is not merely sexual intercourse with women that the
savage warrior sometimes shuns; he is careful to avoid the
sex altogether. Thus among the hill tribes of Assam, not
only are men forbidden to cohabit with their wives during
or after a raid, but they may not eat food cooked by
a woman; nay they should not address a word even to
their own wives. Once a woman, who unwittingly broke the
rule by speaking to her husband while he was under the
war taboo, sickened and died when she learned the awful
crime she had committed.<note place='foot'>T. C. Hodson, <q>The <foreign rend='italic'>genna</foreign>
amongst the Tribes of Assam,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxvi.
(1906) p. 100.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='5. Manslayers tabooed.'/>
<head>§ 5. Manslayers tabooed.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Taboos
laid on
warriors
after slaying
their
foes.
The effect
of the
taboos is
to seclude
the tabooed
person
from
ordinary
society.
Seclusion
of manslayers
in
the East
Indies.</note>
If the reader still doubts whether the rules of conduct
which we have just been considering are based on superstitious
fears or dictated by a rational prudence, his doubts
will probably be dissipated when he learns that rules of the
same sort are often imposed even more stringently on
warriors after the victory has been won and when all fear
of the living corporeal foe is at an end. In such cases one
motive for the inconvenient restrictions laid on the victors in
their hour of triumph is probably a dread of the angry ghosts
of the slain; and that the fear of the vengeful ghosts does
influence the behaviour of the slayers is often expressly
affirmed. The general effect of the taboos laid on sacred
chiefs, mourners, women at childbirth, men on the war-path,
and so on, is to seclude or isolate the tabooed persons from
ordinary society, this effect being attained by a variety of rules,
which oblige the men or women to live in separate huts or
in the open air, to shun the commerce of the sexes, to avoid
the use of vessels employed by others, and so forth. Now
the same effect is produced by similar means in the case of
victorious warriors, particularly such as have actually shed
the blood of their enemies. In the island of Timor, when a
warlike expedition has returned in triumph bringing the
heads of the vanquished foe, the leader of the expedition is
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
forbidden by religion and custom to return at once to his
own house. A special hut is prepared for him, in which he
has to reside for two months, undergoing bodily and spiritual
purification. During this time he may not go to his wife
nor feed himself; the food must be put into his mouth by
another person.<note place='foot'>S. Müller, <hi rend='italic'>Reizen en Onderzoekingen
in den Indischen Archipel</hi>
(Amsterdam, 1857), ii. 252.</note> That these observances are dictated by
fear of the ghosts of the slain seems certain; for from
another account of the ceremonies performed on the return
of a successful head-hunter in the same island we learn that
sacrifices are offered on this occasion to appease the soul of
the man whose head has been taken; the people think that
some misfortune would befall the victor were such offerings
omitted. Moreover, a part of the ceremony consists of a
dance accompanied by a song, in which the death of the
slain man is lamented and his forgiveness is entreated. <q>Be
not angry,</q> they say, <q>because your head is here with us;
had we been less lucky, our heads might now have been
exposed in your village. We have offered the sacrifice to
appease you. Your spirit may now rest and leave us at
peace. Why were you our enemy? Would it not have
been better that we should remain friends? Then
your blood would not have been spilt and your head would
not have been cut off.</q><note place='foot'>J. S. G. Gramberg, <q>Eene maand
in de binnenlanden van Timor,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verhandelingen
van het Bataviaasch
Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen</hi>,
xxxvi. (1872) pp. 208, 216 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
Compare H. Zondervan, <q>Timor en
de Timoreezen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift van het
Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</hi>,
Tweede Serie, v. (1888) Afdeeling,
meer uitgebreide artikelen, pp.
399, 413. Similarly Gallas returning
from war sacrifice to the jinn or
guardian spirits of their slain foes
before they will re-enter their own
houses (Ph. Paulitschke, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographie
Nordost-Afrikas, die geistige Cultur der
Danâkil, Galla und Somâl</hi>, pp. 50, 136).
Sometimes perhaps the sacrifice consists
of the slayers' own blood. See
below, pp. <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>. Orestes is
said to have appeased the Furies of his
murdered mother by biting off one of
his fingers (Pausanias, viii. 34. 3).</note> The people of Paloo, in
central Celebes, take the heads of their enemies in war
and afterwards propitiate the souls of the slain in the
temple.<note place='foot'>N. Adriani en A. C. Kruijt,
<q>Van Posso naar Parigi, Sigi en
Lindoe,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege het
Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xlii. (1898) p. 451.</note> In some Dyak tribes men on returning from an
expedition in which they have taken human heads are
obliged to keep by themselves and abstain from a variety
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
of things for several days; they may not touch iron nor eat
salt or fish with bones, and they may have no intercourse
with women.<note place='foot'>S. W. Tromp, <q>Uit de Salasila
van Koetei,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land-
en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>,
xxxvii. (1888) p. 74.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Seclusion
of manslayers
in
New
Guinea.</note>
In Logea, an island off the south-eastern extremity of
New Guinea, men who have killed or assisted in killing
enemies shut themselves up for about a week in their
houses. They must avoid all intercourse with their wives
and friends, and they may not touch food with their hands.
They may eat vegetable food only, which is brought to
them cooked in special pots. The intention of these
restrictions is to guard the men against the smell of the
blood of the slain; for it is believed that if they smelt the
blood, they would fall ill and die.<note place='foot'>Dr. L. Loria, <q>Notes on the
Ancient War Customs of the Natives
of Logea and Neighbourhood,</q> <hi rend='italic'>British
New Guinea, Annual Report for 1894-1895</hi>
(London, 1896), p. 52.</note> In the Toaripi or
Motumotu tribe of south-eastern New Guinea a man who
has killed another may not go near his wife, and may
not touch food with his fingers. He is fed by others,
and only with certain kinds of food. These observances
last till the new moon.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Chalmers, <q>Toaripi,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxvii. (1898) p. 333.</note> Among the tribes at the mouth of
the Wanigela River, in New Guinea, <q>a man who has taken
life is considered to be impure until he has undergone
certain ceremonies: as soon as possible after the deed
he cleanses himself and his weapon. This satisfactorily
accomplished, he repairs to his village and seats himself on
the logs of sacrificial staging. No one approaches him or
takes any notice whatever of him. A house is prepared for
him which is put in charge of two or three small boys as
servants. He may eat only toasted bananas, and only the
centre portion of them&mdash;the ends being thrown away. On
the third day of his seclusion a small feast is prepared by
his friends, who also fashion some new perineal bands for
him. This is called <foreign rend='italic'>ivi poro</foreign>. The next day the man dons
all his best ornaments and badges for taking life, and sallies
forth fully armed and parades the village. The next day a
hunt is organised, and a kangaroo selected from the game
captured. It is cut open and the spleen and liver rubbed
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
over the back of the man. He then walks solemnly down
to the nearest water, and standing straddle-legs in it washes
himself. All the young untried warriors swim between his
legs. This is supposed to impart courage and strength to
them. The following day, at early dawn, he dashes out of
his house, fully armed, and calls aloud the name of his
victim. Having satisfied himself that he has thoroughly
scared the ghost of the dead man, he returns to his house.
The beating of flooring-boards and the lighting of fires is
also a certain method of scaring the ghost. A day later
his purification is finished. He can then enter his wife's
house.</q><note place='foot'>R. E. Guise, <q>On the Tribes
inhabiting the Mouth of the Wanigela
River, New Guinea,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxviii. (1899)
pp. 213 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among the Roro-speaking tribes of British New
Guinea homicides were secluded in the warriors' clubhouse.
They had to pass the night in the building, but during the
day they might paint and decorate themselves and dance in
front of it. For some time they might not eat much food
nor touch it with their hands, but were obliged to pick it up
on a bone fork, the heft of which was wrapped in a banana
leaf. After a while they bathed in the sea and thence
forward for a period of about a month, though they had
still to sleep in the warriors' clubhouse, they were free to eat
as much food as they pleased and to pick it up with their
bare hands. Finally, those warriors who had never killed
a man before assumed a beautiful ornament made of fretted
turtle shell, which none but homicides were allowed to flaunt in
their head-dresses. Then came a dance, and that same night
the men who wore the honourable badge of homicide for
the first time were chased about the village; embers were
thrown at them and firebrands waved in order, apparently,
to drive away the souls of the dead enemies, who seem to
be conceived as immanent in some way in the headgear of
their slayers.<note place='foot'>C. G. Seligmann, <hi rend='italic'>The Melanesians
of British New Guinea</hi> (Cambridge,
1910), p. 298.</note> Again, among the Koita of British New
Guinea, when a man had killed another, whether the victim
were male or female, he did not wash the blood off the
spear or club, but carefully allowed it to dry on the weapon.
On his way home he bathed in fresh or salt water, and
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
on reaching his village went straight to his own house,
where he remained in seclusion for about a week. He was
taboo (<foreign rend='italic'>aina</foreign>): he might not approach women, and he lifted his
food to his mouth with a bone fork. His women-folk were
not obliged to leave the house, but they might not come
near him. At the end of a week he built a rough shelter
in the forest, where he lived for a few days. During this
time he made a new waist-band, which he wore on his
return to the village. A man who has slain another is
supposed to grow thin and emaciated, because he had been
splashed with the blood of his victim, and as the corpse
rotted he wasted away.<note place='foot'>C. G. Seligmann, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
129 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among the Southern Massim of
British New Guinea a warrior who has taken a prisoner or
slain a man remains secluded in his house for six days.
During the first three days he may eat only roasted food
and must cook it for himself. Then he bathes and blackens
his face for the remaining three days.<note place='foot'>C. G. Seligmann, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
563 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The manslayer
unclean.
Driving
away the
ghosts of
the slain.</note>
Among the Monumbos of German New Guinea any one
who has slain a foe in war becomes thereby <q>unclean</q>
(<foreign rend='italic'>bolobolo</foreign>), and they apply the same term <q>unclean</q> to
menstruous and lying-in women and also to everything that
has come into contact with a corpse, which shews that all
these classes of persons and things are closely associated
in their minds. The <q>unclean</q> man who has killed an
enemy in battle must remain a long time in the men's clubhouse,
while the villagers gather round him and celebrate his
victory with dance and song. He may touch nobody, not
even his own wife and children; if he were to touch them
it is believed that they would be covered with sores. He
becomes clean again by washing and using other modes of
purification.<note place='foot'>P. Franz Vormann, <q>Zur Psychologie,
Religion, Soziologie und
Geschichte der Monumbo-Papua,
Deutsch-Neuguinea,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Anthropos</hi>, v.
(1910) pp. 410 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Windessi, Dutch New Guinea, when a party
of head-hunters has been successful, and they are nearing
home, they announce their approach and success by blowing
on triton shells. Their canoes are also decked with
branches. The faces of the men who have taken a head
are blackened with charcoal. If several have taken part in
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
killing the same victim, his head is divided among them.
They always time their arrival so as to reach home in the
early morning. They come rowing to the village with a
great noise, and the women stand ready to dance in the
verandahs of the houses. The canoes row past the <foreign rend='italic'>room
sram</foreign> or house where the young men live; and as they pass,
the murderers throw as many pointed sticks or bamboos at
the wall or the roof as there were enemies killed. The day
is spent very quietly. Now and then they drum or blow
on the conch; at other times they beat the walls of the
houses with loud shouts to drive away the ghosts of the
slain.<note place='foot'>J. L. D. van der Roest, <q>Uit het
leven der Bevolking van Windessi,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en
Volkenkunde</hi>, xl. (1898) pp. 157
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Similarly in the Doreh district of Dutch New
Guinea, if a murder has taken place in the village, the
inhabitants assemble for several evenings in succession and
utter frightful yells to drive away the ghost of the victim in
case he should be minded to hang about the village.<note place='foot'>H. von Rosenberg, <hi rend='italic'>Der malayische
Archipel</hi>, p. 461.</note> So
the Yabim of German New Guinea believe that the spirit of
a murdered man pursues his murderer and seeks to do him
a mischief. Hence they drive away the spirit with shouts
and the beating of drums.<note place='foot'>K. Vetter, in <hi rend='italic'>Nachrichten über
Kaiser Wilhelms-Land und den Bismarck-Archipel</hi>,
1897, p. 94.</note> When the Fijians had buried a
man alive, as they often did, they used at nightfall to make
a great uproar by means of bamboos, trumpet-shells, and so
forth, for the purpose of frightening away his ghost, lest he
should attempt to return to his old home. And to render
his house unattractive to him they dismantled it and clothed
it with everything that to their ideas seemed most repulsive.<note place='foot'>J. E. Erskine, <hi rend='italic'>The Western Pacific</hi>
(London, 1853), p. 477.</note>
On the evening of the day on which they had tortured a
prisoner to death, the American Indians were wont to run
through the village with hideous yells, beating with sticks
on the furniture, the walls, and the roofs of the huts to
prevent the angry ghost of their victim from settling there
and taking vengeance for the torments that his body had
endured at their hands.<note place='foot'>Charlevoix, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de la Nouvelle
France</hi>, vi. pp. 77, 122 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. F.
Lafitau, <hi rend='italic'>Mœ urs des sauvages ameriquains</hi>,
ii. 279. In many places it is
customary to drive away the ghosts
even of persons who have died a
natural death. An account of these
customs is reserved for another work.</note> <q>Once,</q> says a traveller, <q>on
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
approaching in the night a village of Ottawas, I found all the
inhabitants in confusion: they were all busily engaged in
raising noises of the loudest and most inharmonious kind.
Upon inquiry, I found that a battle had been lately fought
between the Ottawas and the Kickapoos, and that the object
of all this noise was to prevent the ghosts of the departed
combatants from entering the village.</q><note place='foot'>W. H. Keating, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of an
Expedition to the Source of St. Peter's
River</hi> (London, 1825), i. 109.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Precautions
taken by
executioners
against the
ghosts of
their
victims.</note>
The executioner at Porto Novo, on the coast of Guinea,
used to decorate his walls with the jawbones of the persons
on whom he had operated in the course of business. But
for this simple precaution their ghosts would unquestionably
have come at night to knock with sobs and groans, in
an insufferable manner, at the door of the room where
he slept the sleep of the just.<note place='foot'>Father Baudin, <q>Féticheurs, ou
ministres religieux des Nègres de la
Guinée,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Missions Catholiques</hi>, xvi.
(1884) p. 332.</note> The temper of a man
who has just been executed is naturally somewhat short,
and in a burst of vexation his ghost is apt to fall foul
of the first person he comes across, without discriminating
between the objects of his wrath with that nicety of judgment
which in calmer moments he may be expected to
display. Hence in China it is, or used to be, customary
for the spectators of an execution to shew a clean pair
of heels to the ghosts as soon as the last head was off.<note place='foot'>Juan de la Concepcion, <hi rend='italic'>Historia
general de Philipinas</hi>, xi. (Manilla,
1791) p. 387.</note>
The same fear of the spirits of his victims leads the
executioner sometimes to live in seclusion for some time
after he has discharged his office. Thus an old writer,
speaking of Issini on the Gold Coast of West Africa, tells
us that the <q>executioners, being reckoned impure for three
days, they build them a separate hut at a distance from
the village. Meantime these fellows run like madmen
through the place, seizing all they can lay hands on;
poultry, sheep, bread, and oil; everything they can touch
is theirs; being deemed so polluted that the owners
willingly give it up. They continue three days confined
to their hut, their friends bringing them victuals. This
time expired, they take their hut in pieces, which they
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
bundle up, not leaving so much as the ashes of their fire.
The first executioner, having a pot on his head, leads them
to the place where the criminal suffered. There they all
call him thrice by his name. The first executioner breaks
his pot, and leaving their old rags and bundles they all
scamper home.</q><note place='foot'>G. Loyer, <q>Voyage to Issini on
the Gold Coast,</q> in T. Astley's <hi rend='italic'>New
General Collection of Voyages and
Travels</hi>, ii. (London, 1745) p. 444.
Among the tribes of the Lower Niger
it is customary for the executioner to
remain in the house for three days
after the execution; during this time
he sleeps on the bare floor, eats off
broken platters, and drinks out of
calabashes or mugs, which are also
damaged. See Major A. G. Leonard,
<hi rend='italic'>The Lower Niger and its Tribes</hi>
(London, 1906), p. 180.</note> Here the thrice-repeated invocation of
the victim by name gives the clue to the rest of the
observances; all of them are probably intended to ward
off the angry ghost of the slain man or to give him the
slip.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Purification
of
manslayers
among the
Basutos,
Bechuanas, and Bageshu. Expulsion
of the
ghosts of
the slain by
the Angoni.</note>
Among the Basutos <q>ablution is specially performed on
return from battle. It is absolutely necessary that the
warriors should rid themselves, as soon as possible, of the
blood they have shed, or the shades of their victims would
pursue them incessantly, and disturb their slumbers. They
go in a procession, and in full armour, to the nearest
stream. At the moment they enter the water a diviner,
placed higher up, throws some purifying substances into
the current. This is, however, not strictly necessary. The
javelins and battle-axes also undergo the process of washing.</q><note place='foot'>E. Casalis, <hi rend='italic'>The Basutos</hi>, p. 258.
So Caffres returning from battle are
unclean and must wash before they
enter their houses (L. Alberti, <hi rend='italic'>De
Kaffers</hi>, p. 104). It would seem that
after the slaughter of a foe the Greeks
or Romans had also to bathe in running
water before they might touch holy
things (Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> ii. 719 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>).</note>
According to another account of the Basuto custom,
<q>warriors who have killed an enemy are purified. The
chief has to wash them, sacrificing an ox in presence of the
whole army. They are also anointed with the gall of the
animal, which prevents the ghost of the enemy from pursuing
them any further.</q><note place='foot'>Father Porte, <q>Les Réminiscences
d'un missionnaire du Basutoland,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Missions Catholiques</hi>, xxviii. (1896)
p. 371. For a fuller description of a
ceremony of this sort see T. Arbousset
et F. Daumas, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage d'exploration
au nord-est de la colonie du Cap de
Bonne-Espérance</hi> (Paris, 1842), pp.
561-563.</note> Among the Bechuanas a man
who has killed another, whether in war or in single combat,
is not allowed to enter the village until he has been purified.
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
The ceremony takes place in the evening. An ox is
slaughtered, and a hole having been made through the
middle of the carcase with a spear, the manslayer has to force
himself through the animal, while two men hold its stomach
open.<note place='foot'><q>Extrait du journal des missions
évangeliques,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de la Société de
Géographie</hi> (Paris), IIme Série, ii.
(1834) pp. 199 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Sometimes instead of being obliged to squeeze through
the carcase of an ox the manslayer is merely smeared with
the contents of its stomach. The ceremony has been
described as follows: <q>In the purification of warriors, too,
the ox takes a conspicuous part. The warrior who has
slain a man in the battle is unclean, and must on no account
enter his own courtyard, for it would be a serious thing if
even his shadow were to fall upon his children. He
studiously keeps himself apart from the civil life of the
town until he is purified. The purification ceremony is
significant. Having bathed himself in running water, or, if
that is not convenient, in water that has been appropriately
medicated, he is smeared by the doctor with the contents
of the stomach of an ox, into which certain powdered
roots have been already mixed, and then the doctor strikes
him on the back, sides, and belly with the large bowel of
an ox.... A doctor takes a piece of roasted beef and
cuts it into small lumps of about the size of a walnut,
laying them carefully on a large wooden trencher. He
has already prepared charcoal, by roasting the root of
certain trees in an old cracked pot, and this he grinds
down and sprinkles on the lumps of meat on the trencher.
Then the army surrounds the trencher, and every one
who has slain a foe in the battle steps forth, kneels
down before the trencher, and takes out a piece of
meat with his mouth, taking care not to touch it or the
trencher with his hands. As he takes the meat, the doctor
gives him a smart cut with a switch. And when he has
eaten that lump of meat his purification is complete. This
ceremony is called <foreign rend='italic'>Go alafsha dintèè</foreign>, or <q>the purification of
the strikers.</q></q> The writer to whom we owe this description
adds: <q>This taking of meat from the trencher without
using the hands is evidently a matter of ritual.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. W. C. Willoughby, <q>Notes
on the Totemism of the Becwana,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxv. (1905) pp. 305 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
observation is correct. Here as in so many cases persons
ceremonially unclean are forbidden to touch food with
defiled hands until their uncleanness has been purged away.
The same taboo is laid on the manslayer by the Bageshu
of British East Africa. Among them a man who has
killed another may not return to his own house on the
same day, though he may enter the village and spend
the night in a friend's house. He kills a sheep and smears
his chest, his right arm, and his head with the contents of
the animal's stomach. His children are brought to him
and he smears them in like manner. Then he smears each
side of the doorway with the tripe and entrails, and finally
throws the rest of the stomach on the roof of his house.
For a whole day he may not touch food with his hands,
but picks it up with two sticks and so conveys it to his
mouth. His wife is not under any such restrictions. She
may even go to mourn for the man whom her husband has
killed, if she wishes to do so.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <q>Notes on the
Bageshu,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Royal Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxxix. (1909)
p. 190.</note> In some Bechuana tribes the
victorious warrior is obliged to eat a piece of the skin of the man
he killed; the skin is taken from about the navel of his victim,
and without it he may not enter the cattle pen. Moreover,
the medicine-man makes a gash with a spear in the warrior's
thigh for every man he has killed.<note place='foot'>Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>The Essential Kafir</hi>,
p. 310.</note> Among the Angoni, a
Zulu tribe settled to the north of the Zambesi, warriors who
have slain foes on an expedition smear their bodies and
faces with ashes, hang garments of their victims on their
persons, and tie bark ropes round their necks, so that the
ends hang down over their shoulders or breasts. This
costume they wear for three days after their return, and
rising at break of day they run through the village uttering
frightful yells to drive away the ghosts of the slain, which,
if they were not thus banished from the houses, might bring
sickness and misfortune on the inmates.<note place='foot'>C. Wiese, <q>Beiträge zur Geschichte
der Zulu im Norden des Zambesi,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</hi>, xxxii. (1900)
pp. 197 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In some Caffre
tribes of South Africa men who have been wounded or
killed an enemy in fight may not see the king nor drink
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
milk till they have been purified. An ox is killed, and its
gall, intestines, and other parts are boiled with roots. Of
this decoction the men have to take three gulps, and the
rest is sprinkled on their bodies. The wounded man has
then to take a stick, spit on it thrice, point it thrice at the
enemy, and then throw it in his direction. After that he
takes an emetic and is declared clean.<note place='foot'>Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>The Essential Kafir</hi>,
pp. 309 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Seclusion
and
purification
of manslayers
in Africa.</note>
In some of these accounts nothing is said of an
enforced seclusion, at least after the ceremonial cleansing,
but some South African tribes certainly require the slayer
of a very gallant foe in war to keep apart from his wife
and family for ten days after he has washed his body in
running water. He also receives from the tribal doctor a
medicine which he chews with his food.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Macdonald, <q>Manners,
Customs, Superstitions, and Religions
of South African Tribes,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xx. (1891)
p. 138; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Light in Africa</hi>, p.
220.</note> When a Nandi
of British East Africa has killed a member of another tribe,
he paints one side of his body, spear, and sword red, and the
other side white. For four days after the slaughter he is
considered unclean and may not go home. He has to build
a small shelter by a river and live there; he may not
associate with his wife or sweetheart, and he may eat
nothing but porridge, beef, and goat's flesh. At the end of
the fourth day he must purify himself by taking a strong
purge made from the bark of the <foreign rend='italic'>segetet</foreign> tree and by
drinking goat's milk mixed with blood.<note place='foot'>A. C. Hollis, <hi rend='italic'>The Nandi</hi> (Oxford,
1909), p. 74. As to the painting of
the body red on one side and white on
the other see also C. W. Hobley,
<hi rend='italic'>Eastern Uganda</hi>, pp. 38, 42; Sir H.
Johnston, <hi rend='italic'>The Uganda Protectorate</hi>,
ii. 868. As to the custom of painting
the bodies of homicides, see below,
p. <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref> note <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi> and p. <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref> note <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>.</note> Among the
Akikuya of British East Africa all who have shed human
blood must be purified. The elders assemble and one of
them cuts a strip of hair from above both ears of each manslayer.
After that the warriors rub themselves with the
dung taken from the stomach of a sheep which has been
slaughtered for the occasion. Finally their bodies are
cleansed with water. All the hair remaining on their heads
is subsequently shaved off by their wives. For a month
after the shedding of blood they may have no contact with
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
women.<note place='foot'>H. R. Tate, <q>Further Notes on
the Kikuyu Tribe of British East Africa,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxiv. (1904) p. 264.</note> On the contrary, when a Ketosh warrior of British
East Africa, who has killed a foe in battle, returns home
<q>it is considered essential that he should have connection
with his wife as soon as convenient; this is believed to
prevent the spirit of his dead enemy from haunting and
bewitching him.</q><note place='foot'>C. W. Hobley, <q>British East
Africa,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxxiii. (1903) p. 353.</note> An Angoni who has killed a man in battle
is obliged to perform certain purificatory ceremonies before
he may return to ordinary life. Amongst other things, he
must be sure to make an incision in the corpse of his slain
foe, in order to let the gases escape and so prevent the body
from swelling. If he fails to do so, his own body will swell
in proportion as the corpse becomes inflated.<note place='foot'>Miss Alice Werner, <hi rend='italic'>Natives of
British Central Africa</hi> (London, 1906),
pp. 67 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among the
Ovambos of southern Africa, when the warriors return to
their villages, those who have killed an enemy pass the first
night in the open fields, and may not enter their houses
until they have been cleansed of the guilt of blood by an
older man, who smears them for this purpose with a kind of
porridge.<note place='foot'>H. Schinz, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsch-Südwest-Afrika</hi>,
p. 321.</note> Herero warriors on their return from battle may
not approach the sacred hearth until they have been purified
from the guilt of bloodshed. They crouch in a circle round
the hearth, but at some distance from it, while the chief
besprinkles their brows and temples with water in which
branches of a holy bush have been placed.<note place='foot'>P. H. Brincker, <q>Heidnisch-religiöse
Sitten der Bantu, speciell
der Ovaherero und Ovambo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>,
lxvii. (1895) p. 289; id., <q>Charakter,
Sitten und Gebräuche speciell
der Bantu Deutsch-Südwestafrikas,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen des Seminars für orientalische
Sprachen zu Berlin</hi>, iii. (1900)
Dritte Abtheilung, p. 76.</note> Again,
ancient Herero custom requires that he who has killed a
man or a lion should have blood drawn from his breast and
upper arm so as to trickle on the ground: a special name
(<foreign rend='italic'>outoni</foreign>) is given to the cuts thus made; they must be made
with a flint, not with an iron tool.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi>, <q>Beobachtungen über die
Deisidämonie der Eingeborenen
Deutsch-Südwest-Afrikas,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>,
lviii. (1890) p. 324; id., in <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>,
lxvii. (1895) p. 289; id., in <hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen
des Seminars für orientalische
Sprachen zu Berlin</hi>, iii. (1900) Dritte
Abtheilung, p. 83.</note> Among the Bantu
tribes of Kavirondo, in eastern Africa, when a man has
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
killed an enemy in warfare he shaves his head on his return
home, and his friends rub a medicine, which generally
consists of goat's dung, over his body to prevent the spirit
of the slain man from troubling him.<note place='foot'>Sir H. Johnston, <hi rend='italic'>The Uganda
Protectorate</hi> (London, 1902), ii. 743
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; C. W. Hobley, <hi rend='italic'>Eastern Uganda</hi>
(London, 1902), p. 20.</note> Exactly the same
custom is practised for the same reason by the Wageia
of German East Africa.<note place='foot'>M. Weiss, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völkerstämme im
Norden Deutsch-Ostafrikas</hi> (Berlin,
1910), p. 198.</note> With the Ja-Luo of Kavirondo
the custom is somewhat different. Three days after his
return from the fight the warrior shaves his head. But
before he may enter his village he has to hang a live
fowl, head uppermost, round his neck; then the bird is
decapitated and its head left hanging round his neck. Soon
after his return a feast is made for the slain man, in order
that his ghost may not haunt his slayer.<note place='foot'>Sir H. Johnston, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 794;
C. W. Hobley, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 31.</note> After the
slaughter of the Midianites the Israelitish warriors were
obliged to remain outside the camp for seven days: whoever
had killed a man or touched the slain had to purify
himself and his captive. The spoil taken from the enemy
had also to be purified, according to its nature, either by fire
or water.<note place='foot'>Numbers xxxi. 19-24.</note> Similarly among the Basutos cattle taken from
the enemy are fumigated with bundles of lighted branches
before they are allowed to mingle with the herds of the
tribe.<note place='foot'>E. Casalis, <hi rend='italic'>The Basutos</hi>, pp. 258
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Manslayers
in
Australia
guard
themselves
against the
ghosts of
the slain.</note>
The Arunta of central Australia believe that when a
party of men has been out against the enemy and taken a
life, the spirit of the slain man follows the party on its
return and is constantly on the watch to do a mischief
to those of the band who actually shed the blood. It
takes the form of a little bird called the <foreign rend='italic'>chichurkna</foreign>, and
may be heard crying like a child in the distance as it
flies. If any of the slayers should fail to hear its cry,
he would become paralysed in his right arm and shoulder.
At night-time especially, when the bird is flying over
the camp, the slayers have to lie awake and keep the
right arm and shoulder carefully hidden, lest the bird should
look down upon and harm them. When once they have
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
heard its cry their minds are at ease, because the spirit of
the dead then recognises that he has been detected, and can
therefore do no mischief. On their return to their friends,
as soon as they come in sight of the main camp, they begin
to perform an excited war-dance, approaching in the form of
a square and moving their shields as if to ward off something
which was being thrown at them. This action is intended
to repel the angry spirit of the dead man, who is striving to
attack them. Next the men who did the deed of blood
separate themselves from the others, and forming a line,
with spears at rest and shields held out in front, stand silent
and motionless like statues. A number of old women now
approach with a sort of exulting skip and strike the shields
of the manslayers with fighting-clubs till they ring again.
They are followed by men who smite the shields with
boomerangs. This striking of the shields is supposed to be
a very effective way of frightening away the spirit of the
dead man. The natives listen anxiously to the sounds
emitted by the shields when they are struck; for if any
man's shield gives forth a hollow sound under the blow, that
man will not live long, but if it rings sharp and clear, he is
safe. For some days after their return the slayers will not
speak of what they have done, and continue to paint themselves
all over with powdered charcoal, and to decorate their
foreheads and noses with green twigs. Finally, they paint
their bodies and faces with bright colours, and become free
to talk about the affair; but still of nights they must lie
awake listening for the plaintive cry of the bird in which
they fancy they hear the voice of their victim.<note place='foot'>Spencer and Gillen, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes
of Central Australia</hi>, pp. 493-495;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</hi>,
pp. 563-568. The writers
suggest that the practice of painting
the slayers black is meant to render
them invisible to the ghost. A widow,
on the contrary, must paint her body
white, in order that her husband's spirit
may see that she is mourning for him.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Seclusion
of manslayers
in
Polynesia.</note>
In the Washington group of the Marquesas Islands, the
man who has slain an enemy in battle becomes tabooed for
ten days, during which he may hold no intercourse with his
wife, and may not meddle with fire. Hence another has to
make fire and to cook for him. Nevertheless he is treated
with marked distinction and receives presents of pigs.<note place='foot'>G. H. von Langsdorff, <hi rend='italic'>Reise um
die Welt</hi> (Frankfort, 1812), i. 114 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
Fiji any one who had clubbed a human being to death in
war was consecrated or tabooed. He was smeared red by
the king with turmeric from the roots of his hair to his
heels. A hut was built, and in it he had to pass the next
three nights, during which he might not lie down, but must
sleep as he sat. Till the three nights had elapsed he might
not change his garment, nor remove the turmeric, nor enter
a house in which there was a woman.<note place='foot'>T. Williams, <hi rend='italic'>Fiji and the Fijians</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
i. 55 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the Pelew
Islands, when the men return from a warlike expedition in
which they have taken a life, the young warriors who have
been out fighting for the first time, and all who handled the
slain, are shut up in the large council-house and become
tabooed. They may not quit the edifice, nor bathe, nor
touch a woman, nor eat fish; their food is limited to coco-nuts
and syrup. They rub themselves with charmed leaves
and chew charmed betel. After three days they go together
to bathe as near as possible to the spot where the man was
killed.<note place='foot'>J. Kubary, <hi rend='italic'>Die socialen Einrichtungen
der Pelauer</hi> (Berlin, 1885), pp.
126 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 130.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Seclusion
and
purification
of manslayers
among
the Tupi
Indians
of Brazil.</note>
When the Tupi Indians of Brazil had made a
prisoner in war, they used to bring him home amid great
rejoicings, decked with the gorgeous plumage of tropical
birds. In the village he was well treated: he received a
house and furniture and was married to a wife. When he
was thus comfortably installed, the relations and friends of
his captor, who had the first pick, came and examined him
and decided which of his limbs and joints they proposed
to eat; and according to their choice they were bound
to provide him with victuals. Thus he might live for
months or years, treated like a king, supplied with all the
delicacies of the country, and rearing a family of children
who, when they were big, might or might not be eaten
with their father. While he was thus being fattened like
a capon for the slaughter, he wore a necklace of fruit or
of fish-bones strung on a cotton thread. This was the
measure of his life. For every fruit or every bone on the
string he had a month to live; and as each moon waned
and vanished they took a fruit or a bone from the necklace.
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
When only one remained, they sent out invitations to
friends and neighbours far and near, who flocked in, sometimes
to the number of ten or twelve thousand, to witness
the spectacle and partake of the feast; for often a number
of prisoners were to die the same day, father, mother, and
children all together. As a rule they shewed a remarkable
stolidity and indifference to death. The club with which
they were to be despatched was elaborately prepared by the
women, who adorned it with tassels of feathers, smeared it
with the pounded shells of a macaw's eggs, and traced lines
on the egg-shell powder. Then they hung it to a pole,
above the ground, in an empty hut, and sang around it all
night. The executioner, who was painted grey with ashes
and his whole body covered with the beautiful feathers of
parrots and other birds of gay plumage, performed his office
by striking the victim on the head from behind and dashing
out his brains. No sooner had he despatched the prisoner
than he retired to his house, where he had to stay all that
day without eating or drinking, while the rest of the people
feasted on the body of the victim or victims. And for
three days he was obliged to fast and remain in seclusion.
All this time he lay in his hammock and might not set foot
on the ground; if he had to go anywhere, he was carried
by bearers. They thought that, were he to break this rule,
some disaster would befall him or he would die. Meantime
he was given a small bow and passed his time in shooting
arrows into wax. This he did in order to keep his hand
and aim steady. In some of the tribes they rubbed the
pulse of the executioner with one of the eyes of his victim,
and hung the mouth of the murdered man like a bracelet
on his arm. Afterwards he made incisions in his breast,
arms, and legs, and other parts of his body with a saw
made of the teeth of an animal. An ointment and a black
powder were then rubbed into the wounds, which left
ineffaceable scars so artistically arranged that they presented
the appearance of a tightly-fitting garment. It was
believed that he would die if he did not thus draw blood
from his own body after slaughtering the captive.<note place='foot'>F. A. Thevet, <hi rend='italic'>Les Singularités de
la France Antarctique, autrement
nommée Amérique</hi> (Antwerp, 1558),
pp. 74-76; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Cosmographie universelle</hi>
(Paris, 1575), pp. 944 [978] <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Pero de Magalhanes de Gandavo,
<hi rend='italic'>Histoire de la province de Sancta-Cruz</hi>
(Paris, 1837), pp. 134-141 (H. Ternaux-Compans,
<hi rend='italic'>Voyages, relations, et
mémoires originaux pour servir à
l'histoire de la découverte de l'Amérique</hi>;
the original of Gandavo's work
was published in Portuguese at Lisbon
in 1576); J. Lery, <hi rend='italic'>Historia navigationis
in Brasiliam, quae et America
dicitur</hi> (1586), pp. 183-194; <hi rend='italic'>The
Captivity of Hans Stade of Hesse, in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1547-1555, among the Wild
Tribes of Eastern Brazil</hi>, translated
by A. Tootal (London, 1874), pp.
155-159; J. F. Lafitau, <hi rend='italic'>Mœurs des
sauvages ameriquains</hi>, ii. 292 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; R.
Southey, <hi rend='italic'>History of Brazil</hi>, i.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 227-232.</note> We
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
may conjecture that the original intention of these customs
was to guard the executioner against the angry and
dangerous ghosts of his victims.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Seclusion
and
purification
of manslayers
among
the North
American
Indians.</note>
Among the Natchez of North America young braves
who had taken their first scalps were obliged to observe
certain rules of abstinence for six months. They
might not sleep with their wives nor eat flesh; their
only food was fish and hasty-pudding. If they broke
these rules, they believed that the soul of the man
they had killed would work their death by magic, that
they would gain no more successes over the enemy, and
that the least wound inflicted on them would prove
mortal.<note place='foot'><q>Relation des Natchez,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Voyages
au nord</hi>, ix. 24 (Amsterdam, 1737);
<hi rend='italic'>Lettres édifiantes et curieuses</hi>, vii. 26;
Charlevoix, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de la Nouvelle
France</hi>, vi. 186 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When a Choctaw had killed an enemy and taken
his scalp, he went into mourning for a month, during
which he might not comb his hair, and if his head itched
he might not scratch it except with a little stick which he
wore fastened to his wrist for the purpose.<note place='foot'>Bossu, <hi rend='italic'>Nouveaux Voyages aux
Indes occidentales</hi> (Paris, 1768), ii. 94.</note> This ceremonial
mourning for the enemies they had slain was not uncommon
among the North American Indians. Thus the Dacotas, when
they had killed a foe, unbraided their hair, blackened themselves
all over, and wore a small knot of swan's down on the
top of the head. <q>They dress as mourners yet rejoice.</q><note place='foot'>H. R. Schoolcraft, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes</hi>,
iv. 63.</note> A
Thompson River Indian of British Columbia, who had slain
an enemy, used to blacken his own face, lest his victim's
ghost should blind him.<note place='foot'>J. Teit, <q>The Thompson Indians
of British Columbia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Memoir of the
American Museum of Natural History,
The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</hi>,
vol. i. part iv. (April 1900) p. 357.</note> When the Osages have mourned
over their own dead, <q>they will mourn for the foe just as if
he was a friend.</q><note place='foot'>J. O. Dorsey, <q>An Account of the
War Customs of the Osages,</q> <hi rend='italic'>American
Naturalist</hi>, xviii. (1884) p. 126.</note> From observing the great respect paid by
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
the Indians to the scalps they had taken, and listening to the
mournful songs which they howled to the shades of their
victims, Catlin was convinced that <q>they have a superstitious
dread of the spirits of their slain enemies, and many conciliatory
offices to perform, to ensure their own peace.</q><note place='foot'>G. Catlin, <hi rend='italic'>North American
Indians</hi>, i. 246.</note> When
a Pima Indian has killed an Apache, he must undergo purification.
Sixteen days he fasts, and only after the fourth day
is he allowed to drink a little pinole. During the whole time
he may not touch meat nor salt, nor look on a blazing fire,
nor speak to a human being. He lives alone in the woods,
waited on by an old woman, who brings him his scanty dole
of food. He bathes often in a river, and keeps his head
covered almost the whole time with a plaster of mud. On
the seventeenth day a large space is cleared near the village
and a fire lit in the middle of it. The men of the tribe
form a circle round the fire, and outside of it sit all the
warriors who have just been purified, each in a small
excavation. Some of the old men then take the weapons
of the purified and dance with them in the circle, after which
both the slayer and his weapon are considered clean; but
not until four days later is the man allowed to return to
his family.<note place='foot'>H. H. Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>Native Races of
the Pacific States</hi>, i. 553; Capt.
Grossman, cited in <hi rend='italic'>Ninth Annual
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</hi>
(Washington, 1892), pp. 475 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The
custom of plastering the head with mud
was observed by Egyptian women in
mourning (Herodotus, ii. 85; Diodorus
Siculus, i. 91). Among some of
the aboriginal tribes of Victoria and
New South Wales widows wore a thick
skullcap of clay or burned gypsum,
forming a cast of the head, for some
months after the death; when the
period of mourning was over, the cap
was removed, baked in the fire, and
laid on the husband's grave. One of
these widows' caps is exhibited in the
British Museum. See T. L. Mitchell,
<hi rend='italic'>Three Expeditions into the Interior of
Eastern Australia</hi> (London, 1838), i.
251 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. J. Eyre, <hi rend='italic'>Journals of
Expeditions of Discovery into Central
Australia</hi>, ii. 354; G. F. Angas, <hi rend='italic'>Savage
Life and Scenes in Australia and New
Zealand</hi> (London, 1847), i. 86; G.
Krefft, <q>On the Manners and Customs
of the Aborigines of the Lower Murray
and Darling,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the Philosophical
Society of New South Wales</hi>,
1862-1865 (Sydney, 1866), pp. 373
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. Dawson, <hi rend='italic'>Australian Aborigines</hi>,
p. 66; R. Brough Smyth, <hi rend='italic'>The Aborigines
of Victoria</hi>, i. p. xxx.; W.
Stanbridge, <q>On the Aborigines of
Victoria,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the Ethnological
Society of London</hi>, N.S., i. (1861)
p. 298; A. Oldfield, <q>The Aborigines
of Australia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> iii. (1865) p. 248;
F. Bonney, <q>On some Customs of the
Aborigines of the River Darling, New
South Wales,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xiii. (1884) p. 135;
E. M. Curr, <hi rend='italic'>The Australian Race</hi>, i.
88, ii. 238 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, iii. 21; A. W. Howitt,
<hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South-East Australia</hi>,
pp. 248, 452; R. Etheridge, jun.,
<q>The <q>Widow's Cap</q> of the Australian
Aborigines,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the Linnaean
Society of New South Wales for the Year
1899</hi>, xxiv. (Sydney, 1900) pp. 333-345
(with illustrations). In the
Andaman Islands mourners coat their
heads with a thick mass of white clay
(Jagor, in <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen der Berliner
Gesellschaft für Anthropologie</hi>, 1876,
p. (57); M. V. Portman, <q>Disposal
of the Dead among the Andamanese,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>, xxv. (1896) p. 57;
compare E. H. Man, <hi rend='italic'>Aboriginal Inhabitants
of the Andaman Islands</hi>, pp.
73, 75). Among the Bahima of the
Uganda Protectorate, when herdsmen
water their cattle in the evening, they
plaster their faces and bodies with
white clay, at the same time stiffening
their hair with mud into separate
lumps. This mud is left on the head
for days till it crumbles into dust (Sir
H. Johnston, <hi rend='italic'>The Uganda Protectorate</hi>,
ii. 626, compare 620).</note> No doubt the peace enforced by the
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
government of the United States has, along with tribal
warfare, abolished also these quaint customs. A fuller
account of them has been given by a recent writer, and it
deserves to be quoted at length. <q>There was no law among
the Pimas,</q> he says, <q>observed with greater strictness than
that which required purification and expiation for the deed
that was at the same time the most lauded&mdash;the killing of
an enemy. For sixteen days the warrior fasted in seclusion
and observed meanwhile a number of tabus.... Attended
by an old man, the warrior who had to expiate the crime of
blood guilt retired to the groves along the river bottom at
some distance from the villages or wandered about the
adjoining hills. During the period of sixteen days he was
not allowed to touch his head with his fingers or his hair
would turn white. If he touched his face it would become
wrinkled. He kept a stick to scratch his head with, and at
the end of every four days this stick was buried at the root
and on the west side of a cat's claw tree and a new stick
was made of greasewood, arrow bush, or any other convenient
shrub. He then bathed in the river, no matter how cold
the temperature. The feast of victory which his friends
were observing in the meantime at the village lasted eight
days. At the end of that time, or when his period of retirement
was half-completed, the warrior might go to his home
to get a fetish made from the hair of the Apache whom he
had killed. The hair was wrapped in eagle down and tied
with a cotton string and kept in a long medicine basket.
He drank no water for the first two days and fasted for the
first four. After that time he was supplied with pinole by
his attendant, who also instructed him as to his future conduct,
telling him that he must henceforth stand back until
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
all others were served when partaking of food and drink.
If he was a married man his wife was not allowed to eat
salt during his retirement, else she would suffer from the
owl disease which causes stiff limbs. The explanation
offered for the observance of this law of lustration is that
if it is not obeyed the warrior's limbs will become stiffened
or paralyzed.</q><note place='foot'>F. Russell, <q>The Pima Indians,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Twenty-Sixth Annual Report of the
Bureau of American Ethnology</hi> (Washington,
1908), pp. 204 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Apaches, the enemies of the Pimas,
purify themselves for the slaughter of their foes by means of
baths in the sweat-house, singing, and other rites. These
ceremonies they perform for all the dead simultaneously
after their return home; but the Pimas, more punctilious on
this point, resort to their elaborate ceremonies of purification
the moment a single one of their own band or of the enemy
has been laid low.<note place='foot'>J. G. Bourke, <hi rend='italic'>On the Border with
Crook</hi>, p. 203.</note> How heavily these religious scruples
must have told against the Pimas in their wars with their
ferocious enemies is obvious enough. <q>This long period of
retirement immediately after a battle,</q> says an American
writer, <q>greatly diminished the value of the Pimas as scouts
and allies for the United States troops operating against
the Apaches. The bravery of the Pimas was praised by all
army officers having any experience with them, but Captain
Bourke and others have complained of their unreliability, due
solely to their rigid observance of this religious law.</q><note place='foot'>F. Russell, <q>The Pima Indians,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Twenty-Sixth Annual Report of the
Bureau of American Ethnology</hi> (Washington,
1908), p. 204.</note> In
nothing, perhaps, is the penalty which superstition sooner or
later entails on its devotees more prompt and crushing than
in the operations of war.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Taboos
observed
by Indians
who had
slain Esquimaux.</note>
Far away from the torrid home of the Pima and Apaches,
an old traveller witnessed ceremonies of the same sort practised
near the Arctic Circle by some Indians who had surprised
and brutally massacred an unoffending and helpless party
of Esquimaux. His description is so interesting that I will
quote it in full. <q>Among the various superstitious customs
of those people, it is worth remarking, and ought to have been
mentioned in its proper place, that immediately after my companions
had killed the Esquimaux at the Copper River, they
considered themselves in a state of uncleanness, which induced
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
them to practise some very curious and unusual ceremonies.
In the first place, all who were absolutely concerned in the
murder were prohibited from cooking any kind of victuals,
either for themselves or others. As luckily there were two in
company who had not shed blood, they were employed always
as cooks till we joined the women. This circumstance was
exceedingly favourable on my side; for had there been no
persons of the above description in company, that task, I
was told, would have fallen on me; which would have been
no less fatiguing and troublesome, than humiliating and
vexatious. When the victuals were cooked, all the
murderers took a kind of red earth, or oker, and painted all
the space between the nose and chin, as well as the greater
part of their cheeks, almost to the ears, before they would
taste a bit, and would not drink out of any other dish, or
smoke out of any other pipe, but their own; and none of
the others seemed willing to drink or smoke out of theirs.
We had no sooner joined the women, at our return from the
expedition, than there seemed to be an universal spirit of
emulation among them, vying who should first make a suit of
ornaments for their husbands, which consisted of bracelets
for the wrists, and a band for the forehead, composed of
porcupine quills and moose-hair, curiously wrought on
leather. The custom of painting the mouth and part of
the cheeks before each meal, and drinking and smoking out
of their own utensils, was strictly and invariably observed,
till the winter began to set in; and during the whole of that
time they would never kiss any of their wives or children.
They refrained also from eating many parts of the deer and
other animals, particularly the head, entrails, and blood; and
during their uncleanness, their victuals were never sodden in
water, but dried in the sun, eaten quite raw, or broiled, when
a fire fit for the purpose could be procured. When the
time arrived that was to put an end to these ceremonies,
the men, without a female being present, made a fire at
some distance from the tents, into which they threw all
their ornaments, pipe-stems, and dishes, which were soon
consumed to ashes; after which a feast was prepared, consisting
of such articles as they had long been prohibited
from eating; and when all was over, each man was at
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
liberty to eat, drink, and smoke as he pleased; and also to
kiss his wives and children at discretion, which they seemed
to do with more raptures than I had ever known them do
it either before or since.</q><note place='foot'>S. Hearne, <hi rend='italic'>Journey from Prince of
Wales's Fort in Hudson's Bay to the
Northern Ocean</hi> (London, 1795), pp.
204-206. The custom of painting the
face or the body of the manslayer,
which may perhaps be intended to
disguise him from the vengeful spirit
of the slain, is practised by other
peoples, as by the Nandi (see above,
p. <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>). Among the Ba-Yaka of the
Congo Free State a man who has been
slain in battle is supposed to send his
soul to avenge his death on his slayer;
but the slayer can protect himself
against the ghost by wearing the red
tail-feathers of a parrot in his hair and
painting his forehead red (E. Torday
and T. A. Joyce, <q>Notes on the
Ethnography of the Ba-Yaka,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxvi.
(1906) pp. 50 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>). Among the Borâna
Gallas, when a war-party has returned
to the village, the victors who have slain
a foe are washed by the women with a
mixture of fat and butter, and their
faces are painted with red and white
(Ph. Paulitschke, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographie Nord-ost-Afrikas:
die materielle Cultur der
Danâkil, Galla und Somâl</hi> (Berlin,
1893), p. 258). When Masai warriors
kill enemies in fight they paint the
right half of their own bodies red and
the left half white (A. C. Hollis, <hi rend='italic'>The
Masai</hi>, p. 353). Among the Wagogo of
German East Africa, a man who has
killed an enemy in battle paints a red
circle round his right eye and a black
circle round his left eye (Rev. H. Cole,
<q>Notes on the Wagogo of German
East Africa,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxxii. (1902) p. 314).
Among the Angoni of central Africa,
after a successful raid, the leader calls
together all who have killed an enemy
and paints their faces and heads white;
also he paints a white band round the
body under the arms and across the
chest (<hi rend='italic'>British Central Africa Gazette</hi>,
No. 86, vol. v. No. 6 (April 30,
1898), p. 2). A Koossa Caffre who
has slain a man is accounted unclean.
He must roast some flesh on a fire
kindled with wood of a special sort
which imparts a bitter flavour to the
meat. This flesh he eats, and afterwards
blackens his face with the ashes
of the fire. After a time he may wash
himself, rinse his mouth with fresh
milk, and paint himself brown again.
From that moment he is clean (H.
Lichtenstein, <hi rend='italic'>Reisen im südlichen
Africa</hi>, i. 418). Among the Yabim of
German New Guinea, when the
relations of a murdered man have
accepted a bloodwit instead of avenging
his death, they must allow the family
of the murderer to mark them with
chalk on the brow. If this is not
done, the ghost of their murdered
kinsman may come and trouble them
for not doing their duty by him; for
example, he may drive away their
swine or loosen their teeth (K. Vetter,
in <hi rend='italic'>Nachrichten über Kaiser Wilhelms-Land
und den Bismarck-Archipel</hi>,
1897, p. 99). In this last case the
marking the face with chalk seems to be
clearly a disguise to outwit the ghost.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The purification
of
murderers,
like that of
warriors
who have
slain
enemies,
was probably
intended
to
avert or
appease
the ghosts
of the
slain. Ancient
Greek
dread of
the ghosts
of the
slain.</note>
Thus we see that warriors who have taken the life of
a foe in battle are temporarily cut off from free intercourse
with their fellows, and especially with their wives, and
must undergo certain rites of purification before they are
readmitted to society. Now if the purpose of their seclusion
and of the expiatory rites which they have to perform is,
as we have been led to believe, no other than to shake
off, frighten, or appease the angry spirit of the slain man,
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
we may safely conjecture that the similar purification of
homicides and murderers, who have imbrued their hands in
the blood of a fellow-tribesman, had at first the same significance,
and that the idea of a moral or spiritual regeneration
symbolised by the washing, the fasting, and so on, was merely
a later interpretation put upon the old custom by men who
had outgrown the primitive modes of thought in which the
custom originated. The conjecture will be confirmed if we
can shew that savages have actually imposed certain restrictions
on the murderer of a fellow-tribesman from a definite
fear that he is haunted by the ghost of his victim. This
we can do with regard to the Omahas, a tribe of the
Siouan stock in North America. Among these Indians the
kinsmen of a murdered man had the right to put the
murderer to death, but sometimes they waived their right in
consideration of presents which they consented to accept.
When the life of the murderer was spared, he had to observe
certain stringent rules for a period which varied from two to
four years. He must walk barefoot, and he might eat no warm
food, nor raise his voice, nor look around. He was compelled
to pull his robe about him and to have it tied at the
neck even in hot weather; he might not let it hang loose or
fly open. He might not move his hands about, but had to
keep them close to his body. He might not comb his hair
and it might not be blown about by the wind. When the
tribe went out hunting, he was obliged to pitch his tent
about a quarter of a mile from the rest of the people <q>lest
the ghost of his victim should raise a high wind, which might
cause damage.</q> Only one of his kindred was allowed to
remain with him at his tent. No one wished to eat with him,
for they said, <q>If we eat with him whom Wakanda hates
Wakanda will hate us.</q> Sometimes he wandered at night
crying and lamenting his offence. At the end of his long
isolation the kinsmen of the murdered man heard his crying
and said, <q>It is enough. Begone, and walk among the crowd.
Put on moccasins and wear a good robe.</q><note place='foot'>J. Owen Dorsey, <q>Omaha Sociology,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Third Annual Report of the
Bureau of Ethnology</hi> (Washington,
1884), p. 369.</note> Here the reason
alleged for keeping the murderer at a considerable distance
from the hunters gives the clue to all the other restrictions
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>
laid on him: he was haunted and therefore dangerous. The
ancient Greeks believed that the soul of a man who had just
been killed was wroth with his slayer and troubled him;
wherefore it was needful even for the involuntary homicide
to depart from his country for a year until the anger of the
dead man had cooled down; nor might the slayer return
until sacrifice had been offered and ceremonies of purification
performed. If his victim chanced to be a foreigner, the
homicide had to shun the native country of the dead man as
well as his own.<note place='foot'>Plato, Laws, ix. pp. 865 D-866 A;
Demosthenes, <hi rend='italic'>Contra Aristocr.</hi> pp. 643
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Hesychius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> ἀπενιαυτιαμὸς.</note> The legend of the matricide Orestes, how
he roamed from place to place pursued by the Furies of his
murdered mother, and none would sit at meat with him, or take
him in, till he had been purified,<note place='foot'>Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Iphig. in Taur.</hi> 940
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Pausanias, ii. 31. 8. We may
compare the wanderings of the other
matricide Alcmaeon, who could find no
rest till he came to a new land on
which the sun had not yet shone when
he murdered his mother (Thucydides,
ii. 102; Apollodorus, iii. 7. 5; Pausanias,
viii. 24. 8).</note> reflects faithfully the real
Greek dread of such as were still haunted by an angry ghost.
When the turbulent people of Cynaetha, after perpetrating
an atrocious massacre, sent an embassy to Sparta, every
Arcadian town through which the envoys passed on their
journey ordered them out of its walls at once; and the
Mantineans, after the embassy had departed, even instituted
a solemn purification of the city and its territory by carrying
sacrificial victims round them both.<note place='foot'>Polybius, iv. 21.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Taboos
imposed on
men who
have partaken
of
human
flesh.</note>
Among the Kwakiutl Indians of British Columbia, men
who have partaken of human flesh as a ceremonial rite
are subject for a long time afterwards to many restrictions
or taboos of the sort we have been dealing with. They
may not touch their wives for a whole year; and during the
same time they are forbidden to work or gamble. For four
months they must live alone in their bedrooms, and when
they are obliged to quit the house for a necessary purpose,
they may not go out at the ordinary door, but must use
only the secret door in the rear of the house. On such
occasions each of them is attended by all the rest, carrying
small sticks. They must all sit down together on a long
log, then get up, then sit down again, repeating this three
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
times before they are allowed to remain seated. Before
they rise they must turn round four times. Then they go
back to the house. Before entering they must raise their
feet four times; with the fourth step they really pass the
door, taking care to enter with the right foot foremost. In
the doorway they turn four times and walk slowly into
the house. They are not permitted to look back. During
the four months of their seclusion each man in eating
must use a spoon, dish, and kettle of his own, which are
thrown away at the end of the period. Before he draws
water from a bucket or a brook, he must dip his cup
into it thrice; and he may not take more than four
mouthfuls at one time. He must carry a wing-bone of
an eagle and drink through it, for his lips may not touch
the brim of his cup. Also he keeps a copper nail to
scratch his head with, for were his own nails to touch his
own skin they would drop off. For sixteen days after
he has partaken of human flesh he may not eat any
warm food, and for the whole of the four months he is
forbidden to cool hot food by blowing on it with his
breath. At the end of winter, when the season of ceremonies
is over, he feigns to have forgotten the ordinary ways of
men, and has to learn everything anew. The reason for
these remarkable restrictions imposed on men who have
eaten human flesh is not stated; but we may surmise that
fear of the ghost of the man whose body was eaten has at
least a good deal to do with them. We are confirmed in
our conjecture by observing that though these cannibals
sometimes content themselves with taking bites out of living
people, the rules in question are especially obligatory on
them after they have devoured a corpse. Moreover, the
careful treatment of the bones of the victim points to the
same conclusion; for during the four months of seclusion
observed by the cannibals, the bones of the person on whom
they feasted are kept alternately for four days at a time under
rocks in the sea and in their bedrooms on the north side of
the house, where the sun cannot shine on them. Finally the
bones are taken out of the house, tied up, weighted with a
stone, and thrown into deep water, <q>because it is believed
that if they were buried they would come back and take
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
their master's soul.</q><note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, <q>The Social Organization
and the Secret Societies of the
Kwakiutl Indians,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Report of the U.S.
National Museum for 1895</hi>, pp. 440,
537 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> This seems to mean that if the bones
of the victim were buried, his ghost would come back and
fetch away the souls of the men who had eaten his body.
The Gebars, a cannibal tribe in the north of New Guinea,
are much afraid of the spirit of a slain man or woman.
Among them persons who have partaken of human flesh
for the first time reside for a month afterwards in a small
hut and may not enter the dwelling-house.<note place='foot'>Th. H. Ruys, <q>Bezoek an den
Kannibalenstam van Noord Nieuw-Guinea,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift van het koninklijk
Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</hi>,
Tweede Serie, xxiii. (1906) p.
328. Among these savages the genitals
of a murdered man are eaten by
an old woman, and the genitals of
a murdered woman are eaten by an
old man. What the object of this
curious practice may be is not apparent.
Perhaps the intention is to unsex and
disarm the dangerous ghost. On the
dread of ghosts, especially the ghosts
of those who have died a violent death,
see further <hi rend='italic'>Psyche's Task</hi>, pp. 52 sqq.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='6. Hunters and Fishers tabooed.'/>
<head>§ 6. Hunters and Fishers tabooed.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Hunters
and fishers
have to
observe
taboos and
undergo
rites of
purification,
which
are probably
dictated
by
a fear of
the spirits
of the
animals or
fish which
they have
killed or
intended to
kill.</note>
In savage society the hunter and the fisherman have
often to observe rules of abstinence and to submit to
ceremonies of purification of the same sort as those which
are obligatory on the warrior and the manslayer; and
though we cannot in all cases perceive the exact purpose
which these rules and ceremonies are supposed to serve,
we may with some probability assume that, just as the
dread of the spirits of his enemies is the main motive for
the seclusion and purification of the warrior who hopes
to take or has already taken their lives, so the huntsman or
fisherman who complies with similar customs is principally
actuated by a fear of the spirits of the beasts, birds, or fish
which he has killed or intends to kill. For the savage
commonly conceives animals to be endowed with souls and
intelligences like his own, and hence he naturally treats them
with similar respect. Just as he attempts to appease the
ghosts of the men he has slain, so he essays to propitiate the
spirits of the animals he has killed. These ceremonies of propitiation
will be described later on in this work;<note place='foot'>Meantime I may refer the reader
to <hi rend='italic'>The Golden Bough</hi>, Second Edition,
vol. ii. pp. 389 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> here we have
to deal, first, with the taboos observed by the hunter and the
<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>
fisherman before or during the hunting and fishing seasons,
and, second, with the ceremonies of purification which have
to be practised by these men on returning with their booty
from a successful chase.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Taboos
and ceremonies
observed
before
catching
whales. Taboos
observed as
a preparation
for
catching
dugong
and turtle. Taboos
observed
as a preparation
for hunting
and fishing. Taboos
and ceremonies
observed
at the
hatching
and pairing
of silkworms.</note>
While the savage respects, more or less, the souls of all
animals, he treats with particular deference the spirits of
such as are either especially useful to him or formidable on
account of their size, strength, or ferocity. Accordingly the
hunting and killing of these valuable or dangerous beasts
are subject to more elaborate rules and ceremonies than the
slaughter of comparatively useless and insignificant creatures.
Thus the Indians of Nootka Sound prepared themselves for
catching whales by observing a fast for a week, during which
they ate very little, bathed in the water several times a day,
sang, and rubbed their bodies, limbs, and faces with shells
and bushes till they looked as if they had been severely torn
with briars. They were likewise required to abstain from
any commerce with their women for the like period, this last
condition being considered indispensable to their success.
A chief who failed to catch a whale has been known to
attribute his failure to a breach of chastity on the part of
his men.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the Adventures and
Sufferings of John R. Jewitt</hi> (Middletown,
1820), pp. 133, 136.</note> It should be remarked that the conduct thus
prescribed as a preparation for whaling is precisely that
which in the same tribe of Indians was required of men
about to go on the war-path.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Rules of the same sort are,
or were formerly, observed by Malagasy whalers. For eight
days before they went to sea the crew of a whaler used to
fast, abstaining from women and liquor, and confessing their
most secret faults to each other; and if any man was found
to have sinned deeply he was forbidden to share in the
expedition.<note place='foot'>Baron d'Unienville, <hi rend='italic'>Statistique de
l'Île Maurice</hi> (Paris, 1838), iii. 271.
Compare A. van Gennep, <hi rend='italic'>Tabou et
Totémisme à Madagascar</hi> (Paris, 1904),
p. 253, who refers to Le Gentil, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage
dans les Mers de l'Inde</hi> (Paris, 1781),
ii. 562.</note> In the island of Kadiak, off the south coast of
Alaska, whalers were reckoned unclean during the fishing
season, and nobody would eat out of the same dish with
them or even come near them. Yet we are told that great
respect was paid to them, and that they were regarded as
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
the purveyors of their country.<note place='foot'>U. Lisiansky, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage Round the
World</hi> (London, 1814), pp. 174, 209.</note> Though it is not expressly
said it seems to be implied, and on the strength of analogy
we may assume, that these Kadiak whalers had to remain
chaste so long as the whaling season lasted. In the island
of Mabuiag continence was imposed on the people both
before they went to hunt the dugong and while the turtles
were pairing. The turtle-season lasts during parts of
October and November; and if at that time unmarried
persons had sexual intercourse with each other, it was
believed that when the canoe approached the floating turtle,
the male would separate from the female and both would
dive down in different directions.<note place='foot'>A. C. Haddon, <q>The Ethnography
of the Western Tribe of Torres Straits,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xix. (1890) p. 397; <hi rend='italic'>Reports of the
Cambridge Anthropological Expedition
to Torres Straits</hi>, v. 271.</note> So at Mowat in New
Guinea men have no relation with women when the turtle
are coupling, though there is considerable laxity of morals
at other times.<note place='foot'>A. C. Haddon, in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xix. (1890)
p. 467.</note> Among the Motu of Port Moresby, in
New Guinea, chastity is enjoined before fishing and wallaby-hunting;
they believe that men who have been unchaste
will be unable to catch the fish and the wallabies, which will
turn round and jeer at their pursuers.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological
Expedition to Torres Straits</hi>, v.
271 note.</note> Among the tribes
about the mouth of the Wanigela River in New Guinea the
preparations for fishing turtle and dugong are most elaborate.
They begin two months before the fishing. A headman is
appointed who becomes holy. On his strict observance of
the laws of the dugong net depends the success of the
season. While the men of the village are making the nets,
this sanctified leader lives entirely secluded from his family,
and may only eat a roasted banana or two after the sun has
gone down. Every evening at sundown he goes ashore and,
stripping himself of all his ornaments, which he is never
allowed to doff at other times, bathes near where the dugongs
feed; as he does so he throws scraped coco-nut and scented
herbs and gums into the water to charm the dugong.<note place='foot'>R. E. Guise, <q>On the Tribes inhabiting
the Mouth of the Wanigela
River,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxviii. (1899) p. 218. The
account refers specially to Bulaa, which
the author describes (pp. 205, 217) as
<q>a marine village</q> and <q>the greatest
fishing village in New Guinea.</q> Probably
it is built out over the water.
This would explain the allusion to the
sanctified headman going ashore daily
at sundown.</note>
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
Among the Roro-speaking tribes of British New Guinea the
magician who performs ceremonies for the success of a wallaby
hunt must abstain from intercourse with his wife for a month
before the hunt takes place; and he may not eat food cooked
by his wife or by any other woman.<note place='foot'>Captain F. R. Barton and Dr.
Strong, in C. G. Seligmann's <hi rend='italic'>The
Melanesians of British New Guinea</hi>
(Cambridge, 1910), pp. 292, 293 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the island of Uap,
one of the Caroline group, every fisherman plying his craft
lies under a most strict taboo during the whole of the fishing
season, which lasts for six or eight weeks. Whenever he is
on shore he must spend all his time in the men's clubhouse
(<foreign rend='italic'>failu</foreign>), and under no pretext whatever may he visit his own
house or so much as look upon the faces of his wife and
womenkind. Were he but to steal a glance at them, they
think that flying fish must inevitably bore out his eyes at
night. If his wife, mother, or daughter brings any gift for
him or wishes to talk with him, she must stand down towards
the shore with her back turned to the men's clubhouse.
Then the fisherman may go out and speak to her, or with
his back turned to her he may receive what she has brought
him; after which he must return at once to his rigorous
confinement. Indeed the fishermen may not even join in
dance and song with the other men of the clubhouse in the
evening; they must keep to themselves and be silent.<note place='foot'>W. H. Furness, <hi rend='italic'>The Island of
Stone Money, Uap of the Carolines</hi>
(Philadelphia and London, 1910), pp.
38 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 44 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Though the fisherman
may have nothing to do with his wife
and family, he is not wholly debarred
from female society; for each of the
men's clubhouses has one young woman,
or sometimes two young women, who
have been captured from another district,
and who cohabit promiscuously
with all the men of the clubhouse. The
name for one of these concubines is
<foreign rend='italic'>mispil</foreign>. See W. H. Furness, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
46 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> There is a similar practice of
polyandry in the men's clubhouses of the
Pelew Islands. See J. Kubary, <hi rend='italic'>Die
socialen Einrichtungen der Pelauer</hi>
(Berlin, 1885), pp. 50 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Compare
<hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second Edition,
pp. 435 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the
Pelew Islands, also, which belong to the Caroline group, fishermen
are likewise debarred from intercourse with women, since
it is believed that any such intercourse would infallibly have
a prejudicial effect on the fishing. The same taboo is said
to be observed in all the other islands of the South Sea.<note place='foot'>J. S. Kubary, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographische
Beiträge zur Kenntnis des Karolinen
Archipels</hi> (Leyden, 1895), p. 127.</note> In
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
Mirzapur, when the seed of the silkworm is brought into the
house, the Kol or Bhuiyar puts it in a place which has been
carefully plastered with holy cow-dung to bring good luck.
From that time the owner must be careful to avoid
ceremonial impurity. He must give up cohabitation with
his wife; he may not sleep on a bed, nor shave himself, nor
cut his nails, nor anoint himself with oil, nor eat food cooked
with butter, nor tell lies, nor do anything else that he deems
wrong. He vows to Singarmati Devi that if the worms are
duly born he will make her an offering. When the cocoons
open and the worms appear, he assembles the women of the
house and they sing the same song as at the birth of a baby,
and red lead is smeared on the parting of the hair of all the
married women of the neighbourhood. When the worms
pair, rejoicings are made as at a marriage.<note place='foot'>W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion and
Folk-lore of Northern India</hi> (Westminster,
1896), ii. 257. In Chota
Nagpur and the Central Provinces of
India the rearers of silk-worms <q>carefully
watch over and protect the worms,
and while the rearing is going on, live
with great cleanliness and self-denial,
abstaining from alcohol and all intercourse
with women, and adhering very
strictly to certain ceremonial observances.
The business is a very
precarious one, much depending on
favourable weather</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Indian Museum
Notes, issued by the Trustees</hi>, vol. i.
No. 3 (Calcutta, 1890), p. 160).</note> Thus the silkworms
are treated as far as possible like human beings.
Hence the custom which prohibits the commerce of the
sexes while the worms are hatching may be only an
extension, by analogy, of the rule which is observed by
many races, that the husband may not cohabit with his
wife during pregnancy and lactation.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Taboos
observed
by fishermen
in
Uganda. Continence
observed
by Bangala
fishermen
and
hunters.</note>
On Lake Victoria Nyanza the Baganda fishermen use a
long stout line which is supported on the surface of the water
by wooden floats, while short lines with baited hooks attached
to them depend from it at frequent intervals. The place
where the fisherman makes his line, whether in his hut or
his garden, is tabooed. People may not step over his cords
or tools, and he himself has to observe a number of restrictions.
He may not go near his wife or any other woman.
He eats alone, works alone, sleeps alone. He may not
wash, except in the lake. He may not eat salt or meat or
butter. He may not smear any fat on his body. When
the line is ready he goes to the god, asks his blessing on it,
and offers him a pot of beer. In return he receives from
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
the deity a stick or bit of wood to fasten to the line, and
also some medicine of herbs to smoke and blow over the
water in order that the fish may come to the line and be
caught. Then he carries the line to the lake. If in going
thither he should stumble over a stone or a tree-root, he
takes it with him, and he does the same with any grass-seeds
that may stick to his clothes. These stones, roots, and seeds
he puts on the line, believing that just as he stumbled over
them and they stuck to him, so the fish will also stumble
over them and stick to the line. The taboo lasts till he has
caught his first fish. If his wife has kept the taboo, he eats
the fish with her; but if she has broken it, she may not
partake of the fish. After that if he wishes to go in to his
wife, he must take his line out of the water and place it in a
tree or some other place of safety; he is then free to be
with her. But so long as the line is in the water, he must
keep apart from women, or the fish would at once leave the
shore. Any breach of this taboo renders the line useless to
him. He must sell it and make a new one and offer an
expiatory offering to the god.<note place='foot'>The Rev. J. Roscoe in letters to
me dated Mengo, Uganda, April 23
and June 6, 1903.</note> Again, in Uganda the
fisherman offers fish to his canoe, believing that if he
neglected to make this offering more than twice, his net
would catch nothing. The fish thus offered to the canoe is
eaten by the fishermen. But if at the time of emptying the
traps there is any man in the canoe who has committed
adultery, eaten flesh or salt, or rubbed his body with butter
or fat, that man is not allowed to partake of the fish offered
to the canoe. And if the sinner has not confessed his fault
to the priest and been purified, the catch will be small.
When the adulterer has confessed his sin, the priest calls the
husband of the guilty woman and tells him of her crime.
Her paramour has to wear a sign to shew that he is doing
penance, and he makes a feast for the injured husband,
which the latter is obliged to accept in token of reconciliation.
After that the husband may not punish either of the
erring couple; the sin is atoned for and they are able to
catch fish again.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <q>Further Notes
on the Manners and Customs of the
Baganda,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxxii. (1902) p.
56.</note> Among the Bangala of the Upper Congo,
<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>
while fishermen are making their traps, they must observe
strict continence, and the restriction lasts until the traps
have caught fish and the fish have been eaten. Similarly
Bangala hunters may have no sexual intercourse from the
time they made their traps till they have caught game and
eaten it; it is believed that any hunter who broke this rule
of chastity would have bad luck in the chase.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. H. Weeks, <q>Anthropological
Notes on the Bangala of the
Upper Congo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxxix. (1909) pp.
458, 459.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Taboos
observed
by hunters
in Nias.</note>
In the island of Nias the hunters sometimes dig pits,
cover them lightly over with twigs, grass, and leaves, and
then drive the game into them. While they are engaged in
digging the pits, they have to observe a number of taboos.
They may not spit, or the game would turn back in disgust
from the pits. They may not laugh, or the sides of the pit
would fall in. They may eat no salt, prepare no fodder for
swine, and in the pit they may not scratch themselves, for if
they did, the earth would be loosened and would collapse.
And the night after digging the pit they may have no intercourse
with a woman, or all their labour would be in vain.<note place='foot'>J. W. Thomas, <q>De jacht op het
eiland Nias,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>, xxvi.
(1880) pp. 276 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The practice
of
continence
by fishers
and hunters
seems to be
based on a
notion
that incontinence
offends the
fish and the
animals.</note>
This practice of observing strict chastity as a condition
of success in hunting and fishing is very common among
rude races; and the instances of it which have been cited
render it probable that the rule is always based on a
superstition rather than on a consideration of the temporary
weakness which a breach of the custom may entail on the
hunter or fisherman. In general it appears to be supposed
that the evil effect of incontinence is not so much that it
weakens him, as that, for some reason or other, it offends
the animals, who in consequence will not suffer themselves
to be caught. In the Motumotu tribe of New Guinea a
man will not see his wife the night before he starts on a
great fishing or hunting expedition; if he did, he would
have no luck. In the Motu tribe he is regarded as holy
that night, and in the morning no one may speak to him or
call out his name.<note place='foot'>J. Chalmers, <hi rend='italic'>Pioneering in New
Guinea</hi> (London, 1887), p. 186.</note> In German East Africa elephant hunters
must refrain from women for several days before they set out
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
for the chase.<note place='foot'>P. Reichard, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsch-Ostafrika</hi>
(Leipsic, 1892), p. 427.</note> We have seen that in the same region a
wife's infidelity during the hunter's absence is believed to
give the elephant power over him so as to kill or wound
him.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, vol. i. p. 123.</note> As this belief is clearly a superstition, based on
sympathetic magic, so doubtless is the practice of chastity
before the hunt. The pygmies of the great African forest
are also reported to observe strict continence the night
before an important hunt. It is said that at this time they
propitiate their ancestors by rubbing their skulls, which they
keep in boxes, with palm oil and with water in which the
ashes of the bark and leaves of a certain tree (<foreign rend='italic'>moduma</foreign>) have
been mixed.<note place='foot'>Mgr. Le Roy, <q>Les Pygmées,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Missions Catholiques</hi>, xxix. (1897) p.
269.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Chastity
observed
by American
Indians
before
hunting.</note>
The Huichol Indians of Mexico think that only the pure
of heart should hunt the deer. The deer would never enter
a snare put up by a man in love; it would only look at it,
snort <q>Pooh, pooh,</q> and go back the way it came. Good
luck in love means bad luck in deer-hunting. But even
those who have been abstinent must invoke the aid of the
fire to burn the last taint or blemish out of them. So the
night before they set out for the chase they gather round the
fire and pray aloud, all trying to get as near as they can to
the flaming god, and turning every side of their bodies to
his blessed influence. They hold out their open hands to it,
warm the palms, spit on them, and then rub them quickly
over their joints, legs, and shoulders, as the shamans do in
curing a sick man, in order that their limbs and sinews may
be as strong as their hearts are pure for the task of the
morrow.<note place='foot'>C. Lumholtz, <hi rend='italic'>Unknown Mexico</hi>,
ii. 40 sq.</note> A Carrier Indian of British Columbia used to
separate from his wife for a full month before he set traps
for bears, and during this time he might not drink from
the same vessel as his wife, but had to use a special cup
made of birch bark. The neglect of these precautions
would cause the game to escape after it had been
snared. But when he was about to snare martens, the
period of continence was cut down to ten days.<note place='foot'>Father A. G. Morice, <q>Notes,
Archaeological, Industrial, and Sociological
on the Western Denés,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the Canadian Institute</hi>, iv.
(1892-93) pp. 107, 108.</note> The Sia,
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
a tribe of Pueblo Indians, observe chastity for four days
before a hunt as well as the whole time that it lasts, even if
the game be only rabbits.<note place='foot'>M. C. Stevenson, <q>The Sia,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Eleventh Annual Report of the Bureau
of Ethnology</hi> (Washington, 1894), p.
118.</note> Among the Tsetsaut Indians of
British Columbia hunters who desire to secure good luck
fast and wash their bodies with ginger-root for three or four
days, and do not touch a woman for two or three months.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, in <hi rend='italic'>Tenth Report on the
North-Western Tribes of Canada</hi>, p.
47 (separate reprint from the <hi rend='italic'>Report of
the British Association for 1895</hi>).</note>
A Shuswap Indian, who intends to go out hunting must
also keep away from his wife, or he would have no luck.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi>, in <hi rend='italic'>Sixth Report on the North-Western
Tribes of Canada</hi>, p. 90
(separate reprint from the <hi rend='italic'>Report of the
British Association for 1890</hi>).</note>
Among the Thompson Indians the grisly-bear hunter must
abstain from sexual intercourse for some time before he went
forth to hunt. These Indians believe that bears always hear
what is said of them. Hence a man who intends to go
bear-hunting must be very careful what he says about the
beasts or about his preparations for killing them, or they
will get wind of it and keep out of his way.<note place='foot'>J. Teit, <q>The Thompson Indians
of British Columbia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Memoir of the
American Museum of Natural History,
The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</hi>,
vol. i. part iv. (April 1900) p. 347.</note> In the same
tribe of Indians some trappers and hunters, who were
very particular, would not eat with other people when they
were engaged, or about to be engaged, in hunting or
trapping; neither would they eat food cooked by any
woman, unless she were old. They drank cold water in
which mountain juniper or wild rhubarb had been soaked,
using a cup of their own, which no one else might touch.
Hunters seldom combed their hair when they were on an
expedition, but waited to do so till their return.<note place='foot'>J. Teit, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 348.</note> The
reason for this last rule is certainly not that at such seasons
they have no time to attend to their persons; the custom is
probably based on that superstitious objection to touch the
heads of tabooed persons of which some examples have already
been given, and of which more will be adduced shortly.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Taboos
observed
by Hidatsa
Indians at
catching
eagles.</note>
In the late autumn or early winter a few families of the
Hidatsa Indians seek some quiet spot in the forest and
pitch their camp there to catch eagles. After setting up their
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
tents they build a small medicine-lodge, where the ceremonies
supposed to be indispensable for trapping the eagles are performed.
No woman may enter it. The traps are set on high
places among the neighbouring hills. When some of the men
wish to take part in the trapping, they fast and then go by day
to the medicine-lodge. There they continue without food
until about midnight, when they partake of a little nourishment
and fall asleep. They get up just before dawn, or
when the morning-star has risen, and go to their traps.
There they sit all day without food or drink, watching for
their prey, and struggling, it may be, from time to time with
a captive eagle, for they always take the birds alive. They
return to the camp at sunset. As they approach, every one
rushes into his tent; for the hunter may neither see nor be
seen by any of his fellow-hunters until he enters the
medicine-lodge. They spend the night in the lodge, and
about midnight eat and drink for the first time since the
previous midnight; then they lie down to sleep, only to
rise again before dawn and repair anew to the traps. If any
one of them has caught nothing during the day, he may not
sleep at night, but must spend his time in loud lamentation
and prayer. This routine has to be observed by each
hunter for four days and four nights, after which he returns
to his own tent, hungry, thirsty, and tired, and follows his
ordinary pursuits till he feels able to go again to the eagle-traps.
During the four days of the trapping he sees none
of his family, and speaks to none of his friends except those
who are engaged in the trapping at the same time. They
believe that if any hunter fails to perform all these rites, the
captive eagle will get one of his claws loose and tear his
captor's hands. There are men in the tribe who have had
their hands crippled for life in that way.<note place='foot'>Washington Matthews, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnography
and Philology of the Hidatsa
Indians</hi> (Washington, 1877), pp.
58-60. Other Indian tribes also
observe elaborate superstitious ceremonies
in hunting eagles. See <hi rend='italic'>Totemism
and Exogamy</hi>, iii. 182, 187
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> It is obvious that
the severe fasting coupled with the short sleep, or even the
total sleeplessness, of these eagle-hunters can only impair
their physical vigour and so far tend to incapacitate them
for capturing the eagles. The motive of their behaviour in
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
these respects is purely superstitious, not rational, and so, we
may safely conclude, is the custom which simultaneously
cuts them off from all intercourse with their wives and
families.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Miscellaneous
examples
of chastity
practised
from superstitious
motives.</note>
An examination of all the many cases in which the savage
bridles his passions and remains chaste from motives of superstition,
would be instructive, but I cannot attempt it now. I will
only add a few miscellaneous examples of the custom before
passing to the ceremonies of purification which are observed by
the hunter and fisherman after the chase and the fishing are
over. The workers in the salt-pans near Siphoum, in Laos,
must abstain from all sexual relations at the place where they
are at work; and they may not cover their heads nor shelter
themselves under an umbrella from the burning rays of the
sun.<note place='foot'>E. Aymonier, <hi rend='italic'>Notes sur le Laos</hi>
(Saigon, 1885), p. 141.</note> Among the Kachins of Burma the ferment used in
making beer is prepared by two women, chosen by lot, who
during the three days that the process lasts may eat nothing
acid and may have no conjugal relations with their husbands;
otherwise it is supposed that the beer would be sour.<note place='foot'>P. Ch. Gilhodes, <q>La Culture
matérielle des Katchins (Birmanie),</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Anthropos</hi>, v. (1910) p. 622. Compare
J. Anderson, <hi rend='italic'>From Mandalay to
Momien</hi> (London, 1876), p. 198, who
observes that among the Kakhyens
(Kachins) the brewing of beer <q>is
regarded as a serious, almost sacred,
task, the women, while engaged in
it, having to live in almost vestal
seclusion.</q></note> Among
the Masai honey-wine is brewed by a man and a woman who
live in a hut set apart for them till the wine is ready for
drinking. But they are strictly forbidden to have sexual
intercourse with each other during this time; it is deemed
essential that they should be chaste for two days before they
begin to brew and for the whole of the six days that the
brewing lasts. The Masai believe that were the couple
to commit a breach of chastity, not only would the wine be
undrinkable but the bees which made the honey would fly
away. Similarly they require that a man who is making
poison should sleep alone and observe other taboos which
render him almost an outcast.<note place='foot'>J. G. Frazer, <hi rend='italic'>Totemism and Exogamy</hi>,
ii. 410 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, on Mr. A. C.
Hollis's authority.</note> The Wandorobbo, a tribe
of the same region as the Masai, believe that the mere
presence of a woman in the neighbourhood of a man who is
brewing poison would deprive the poison of its venom, and
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
that the same thing would happen if the wife of the poison-maker
were to commit adultery while her husband was
brewing the poison.<note place='foot'>M. Weiss, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker-Stämme im
Norden Deutsch-Ostafrikas</hi> (Berlin,
1910), p. 396.</note> In this last case it is obvious that a
rationalistic explanation of the taboo is impossible. How
could the loss of virtue in the poison be a physical consequence
of the loss of virtue in the poison-maker's wife?
Clearly the effect which the wife's adultery is supposed
to have on the poison is a case of sympathetic magic; her
misconduct sympathetically affects her husband and his
work at a distance. We may, accordingly, infer with some
confidence that the rule of continence imposed on the poison-maker
himself is also a simple case of sympathetic magic,
and not, as a civilised reader might be disposed to
conjecture, a wise precaution designed to prevent him
from accidentally poisoning his wife. Again, to take
other instances, in the East Indian island of Buru people
smear their bodies with coco-nut oil as a protection
against demons. But in order that the charm may be
effective, the oil must have been made by young unmarried
girls.<note place='foot'>G. A. Wilken, <q>Bijdrage tot de
Kennis der Alfoeren van het eiland
Boeroe,</q> p. 30 (<hi rend='italic'>Verhandelingen van het
Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten
en Wetenschappen</hi>, xxxvi.).</note> In the Seranglao and Gorong archipelagoes
the same oil is regarded as an antidote to poison;
but it only possesses this virtue if the nuts have been
gathered on a Friday by a youth who has never known
a woman, and if the oil has been extracted by a pure
maiden, while a priest recited the appropriate spells.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik- en kroesharige
rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</hi>,
p. 179.</note> So in
the Marquesas Islands, when a woman was making coco-nut
oil, she was tabooed for four or five or more days,
during which she might have no intercourse with her husband.
If she broke this rule, it was believed that she would obtain
no oil.<note place='foot'>G. H. von Langsdorff, <hi rend='italic'>Reise um
die Welt</hi> (Frankfort, 1812), i. 118
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the same islands when a man had placed a dish of
bananas and coco-nuts in an oven of hot stones to bake over
night, he might not go in to his wife, or the food would not
be found baked in the morning.<note place='foot'>G. H. von Langsdorff, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i.
117.</note> In ancient Mexico
the men who distilled the wine known as <foreign rend='italic'>pulque</foreign> from the
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
sap of the great aloe, might not touch a woman for four days;
if they were unchaste, they thought the wine would be sour
and putrid.<note place='foot'>B. de Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire générale
des choses de la Nouvelle Espagne</hi>,
traduite par D. Jourdanet et R. Simeon,
p. 45.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Miscellaneous
examples
of continence
observed
from superstitious
motives. Continence
observed
by the
Motu of
New
Guinea
before and
during a
trading
voyage. Continence
observed
by the
Akamba
and
Akikuyu
on a
journey
and other
occasions.</note>
Among the Ba-Pedi and Ba-thonga tribes of South
Africa, when the site of a new village has been chosen and
the houses are building, all the married people are forbidden
to have conjugal relations with each other. If it were
discovered that any couple had broken this rule, the work
of building would immediately be stopped, and another site
chosen for the village. For they think that a breach of
chastity would spoil the village which was growing up,
that the chief would grow lean and perhaps die, and
that the guilty woman would never bear another child.<note place='foot'>H. A. Junod, <q>Les Conceptions
physiologiques des Bantou sud-africains
et leurs tabous,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue d'Ethnographie
et de Sociologie</hi>, i. (1910) p.
148.</note>
Among the Chams of Cochin-China, when a dam is made or
repaired on a river for the sake of irrigation, the chief who
offers the traditional sacrifices and implores the protection of
the deities on the work, has to stay all the time in a wretched
hovel of straw, taking no part in the labour, and observing the
strictest continence; for the people believe that a breach of
his chastity would entail a breach of the dam.<note place='foot'>Dameon Grangeon, <q>Les Chams
et leurs superstitions,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Missions Catholiques</hi>,
xxviii. (1896) p. 70.</note> Here, it is
plain, there can be no idea of maintaining the mere bodily
vigour of the chief for the accomplishment of a task in
which he does not even bear a hand. In New Caledonia
the wizard who performs certain superstitious ceremonies at
the building and launching of a large canoe is bound to the
most rigorous chastity the whole time that the vessel is on
the stocks.<note place='foot'>Father Lambert, <q>Mœurs et
superstitions de la tribu Bélep,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Missions Catholiques</hi>, xii. (1880) p.
215; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mœurs et superstitions des
Néo-Calédoniens</hi> (Nouméa, 1900), pp.
191 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among the natives of the Gazelle Peninsula in
New Britain men who are engaged in making fish-traps avoid
women and observe strict continence. They believe that
if a woman were even to touch a fish-trap, it would catch
nothing.<note place='foot'>R. Parkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Dreissig Jahre in
der Südsee</hi> (Stuttgart, 1907), p. 99.</note> Here, therefore, the rule of continence probably
springs from a fear of infecting sympathetically the traps
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
with feminine weakness or perhaps with menstrual pollution.
Every year at the end of September or the beginning of
October, when the north-east monsoon is near an end, a fleet
of large sailing canoes leaves Port Moresby and the neighbouring
Motu villages of New Guinea on a trading voyage to
the deltas of the rivers which flow into the Papuan Gulf. The
canoes are laden with a cargo of earthenware pots, and
after about three months they return, sailing before the north-west
monsoon and bringing back a cargo of sago which they
have obtained by barter for their crockery. It is about the
beginning of the south-east monsoon, that is, in April or May,
that the skippers, who are leading men in the villages, make
up their minds to go on these trading voyages. When their
resolution is taken they communicate it to their wives, and
from about that time husband and wife cease to cohabit.
The same custom of conjugal separation is observed by what
we may call the mate or second in command of each vessel.
But it is not till the month of August that the work of
preparing the canoes for sea by overhauling and caulking
them is taken seriously in hand. From that time both
skipper and mate become particularly sacred or taboo
(<foreign rend='italic'>helaga</foreign>), and consequently they keep apart from their wives
more than ever. Husband and wife, indeed, sleep in the
same house but on opposite sides of it. In speaking of his
wife he calls her <q>maiden,</q> and she calls him <q>youth.</q>
They have no direct conversation or dealings with each
other. If he wishes to communicate with her, he does so
through a third person, usually a relative of one of them.
Both refrain from washing themselves, and he from combing
his hair. <q>The wife's position indeed becomes very much
like that of a widow.</q> When the canoe has been launched,
skipper, mate, and crew are all forbidden to touch their food
with their fingers; they must always handle it and convey
it to their mouths with a bone fork.<note place='foot'>Captain F. R. Barton, in C. G.
Seligmann's <hi rend='italic'>The Melanesians of British
New Guinea</hi> (Cambridge, 1910), pp.
100-102. The native words which I
have translated respectively <q>skipper</q>
and <q>mate</q> are <foreign rend='italic'>baditauna</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>doritauna</foreign>.
The exact meaning of the
words is doubtful.</note> A briefer account of
the custom and superstition had previously been given by a
native pastor settled in the neighbourhood of Port Moresby.
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
He says: <q>Here is a custom of trading-voyage parties:&mdash;If
it is arranged to go westward, to procure arrowroot, the
leader of the party sleeps apart from his wife for the time
being, and on until the return from the expedition, which is
sometimes a term of five months. They say if this is not
done the canoe of the chief will be sunk on the return
voyage, all the arrowroot lost in the sea, and he himself
covered with shame. He, however, who observes the rule of
self-denial, returns laden with arrowroot, has not a drop
of salt water to injure his cargo, and so is praised by his
companions and crew.</q><note place='foot'>Quoted by Dr. George Turner,
<hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi> (London, 1884), pp. 349
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Akamba and Akikuyu of
eastern Africa refrain from the commerce of the sexes on a
journey, even if their wives are with them in the caravan;
and they observe the same rule of chastity so long as the
cattle are at pasture, that is, from the time the herds are
driven out to graze in the morning till they come back in the
evening.<note place='foot'>J. M. Hildebrandt, <q>Ethnographische
Notizen über Wakamba und ihre
Nachbarn,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</hi>,
x. (1878) p. 401.</note> Why the rule should be in force just while the
cattle are at pasture is not said, but we may conjecture that
any act of incontinence at that time is somehow supposed,
on the principles of sympathetic magic, to affect the animals
injuriously. The conjecture is confirmed by the observation
that among the Akikuyu for eight days after the quarterly
festivals, which they hold for the sake of securing God's
blessing on their flocks and herds, no commerce is permitted
between the sexes. They think that any breach of continence
in these eight days would be followed by a mortality
among the flocks.<note place='foot'>H. R. Tate, <q>Further Notes on
the Kikuyu Tribe of British East Africa,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxiv. (1904) pp. 260 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> At the
festivals sheep and goats are sacrificed
to God (<foreign rend='italic'>Ngai</foreign>), and the people feast on
the roast flesh.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The taboos
observed
by hunters
and fishers
are often
continued
and even
increased
in stringency
after
the game
has been
killed and
the fish
caught.
The motive
for this
conduct
can only
be superstitious.</note>
If the taboos or abstinences observed by hunters and
fishermen before and during the chase are dictated, as we
have seen reason to believe, by superstitious motives, and
chiefly by a dread of offending or frightening the spirits of
the creatures whom it is proposed to kill, we may expect
that the restraints imposed after the slaughter has been
perpetrated will be at least as stringent, the slayer and his
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
friends having now the added fear of the angry ghosts of his
victims before their eyes. Whereas on the hypothesis that
the abstinences in question, including those from food, drink,
and sleep, are merely salutary precautions for maintaining
the men in health and strength to do their work, it is
obvious that the observance of these abstinences or taboos
after the work is done, that is, when the game is killed and
the fish caught, must be wholly superfluous, absurd, and
inexplicable. But as I shall now shew, these taboos often
continue to be enforced or even increased in stringency after
the death of the animals, in other words, after the hunter or
fisher has accomplished his object by making his bag or
landing his fish. The rationalistic theory of them therefore
breaks down entirely; the hypothesis of superstition is clearly
the only one open to us.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Taboos
observed
by the
Bering
Strait
Esquimaux
after catching
whales
or salmon.</note>
Among the Inuit or Esquimaux of Bering Strait <q>the
dead bodies of various animals must be treated very carefully
by the hunter who obtains them, so that their shades may
not be offended and bring bad luck or even death upon him
or his people.</q> Hence the Unalit hunter who has had a
hand in the killing of a white whale, or even has helped to
take one from the net, is not allowed to do any work for the
next four days, that being the time during which the shade
or ghost of the whale is supposed to stay with its body. At
the same time no one in the village may use any sharp or
pointed instrument for fear of wounding the whale's shade,
which is believed to be hovering invisible in the neighbourhood;
and no loud noise may be made lest it should frighten
or offend the ghost. Whoever cuts a whale's body with an
iron axe will die. Indeed the use of all iron instruments is
forbidden in the village during these four days. These Inuit
have a special name (<foreign rend='italic'>nu-na hlukh-tuk</foreign>) <q>for a spot of
ground where certain things are tabooed, or where there is
to be feared any evil influence caused by the presence of
offended shades of men or animals, or through the influence
of other supernatural means. This ground is sometimes considered
unclean, and to go upon it would bring misfortune to
the offender, producing sickness, death, or lack of success in
hunting or fishing. The same term is also applied to ground
where certain animals have been killed or have died.</q> In
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
the latter case the ground is thought to be dangerous only to
him who there performs some forbidden act. For example,
the shore where a dead white whale has been beached is so
regarded. At such a place and time to chop wood with an
iron axe is supposed to be fatal to the imprudent person who
chops. Death, too, is supposed to result from cutting wood
with an iron axe where salmon are being dressed. An old
man at St. Michael told Mr. Nelson of a melancholy case of
this kind which had fallen within the scope of his own observation.
A man began to chop a log near a woman who
was splitting salmon: both of them died soon afterwards.
The reason of this disaster, as the old man explained, was
that the shade or ghost (<foreign rend='italic'>inua</foreign>) of the salmon and the spirit
or mystery (<foreign rend='italic'>yu-a</foreign>) of the ground were incensed at the proceeding.
Such offences are indeed fatal to every person who
may be present at the desecrated spot. Dogs are regarded
as very unclean and offensive to the shades of game animals,
and great care is taken that no dog shall get at the bones of
a white whale. Should a dog touch one of them, the
hunter might lose his luck; his nets would break or be
shunned by the whales, and his spears would not strike.
But in addition to the state of uncleanness or taboo which
arises from the presence of the shades of men or animals,
these Esquimaux believe in uncleanness of another sort
which, though not so serious, nevertheless produces sickness
or bad luck in hunting. It consists, we are told, of a kind
of invisible, impalpable vapour, which may attach itself to a
person from some contamination. A hunter infected by
such a vapour is much more than usually visible to game, so
that his luck in the chase is gone until he succeeds in
cleansing himself once more. That is why hunters must
avoid menstruous women; if they do not, they will be unable
to catch game.<note place='foot'>E. W. Nelson, <q>The Eskimo
about Bering Strait,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Eighteenth
Annual Report of the Bureau of
American Ethnology</hi>, part i. (Washington,
1899) pp. 438, 440.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Taboos
observed
by the
Bering
Strait
Esquimaux
and the
Aleuts of
Alaska out
of regard
for the
animals
they have
killed.</note>
These same Esquimaux of Bering Strait celebrate a great
annual festival in December, when the bladders of all the
seals, whales, walrus, and white bears that have been killed
in the year are taken into the assembly-house of the village.
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
They remain there for several days, and so long as they do
so the hunters avoid all intercourse with women, saying that
if they failed in that respect the shades of the dead animals
would be offended.<note place='foot'>E. W. Nelson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 440,
compare pp. 380 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The bladder
festival of these Esquimaux will be
described in a later part of this work.</note> Similarly among the Aleuts of Alaska
the hunter who had struck a whale with a charmed spear
would not throw again, but returned at once to his home and
separated himself from his people in a hut specially constructed
for the purpose, where he stayed for three days
without food or drink, and without touching or looking upon
a woman. During this time of seclusion he snorted
occasionally in imitation of the wounded and dying whale,
in order to prevent the whale which he had struck from
leaving the coast. On the fourth day he emerged from his
seclusion and bathed in the sea, shrieking in a hoarse voice
and beating the water with his hands. Then, taking with
him a companion, he repaired to that part of the shore
where he expected to find the whale stranded. If the beast
was dead he at once cut out the place where the death-wound
had been inflicted. If the whale was not dead, he
again returned to his home and continued washing himself
until the whale died.<note place='foot'>I. Petroff, <hi rend='italic'>Report on the Population,
Industries, and Resources of
Alaska</hi> (preface dated August 7,
1882), pp. 154 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Here the hunter's imitation of the
wounded whale is probably intended by means of homoeopathic
magic to make the beast die in earnest. Among the
Kaniagmuts of Alaska the men who attacked the whale were
considered by their countrymen as unclean during the fishing
season, though otherwise they were held in high honour.<note place='foot'>W. H. Dall, <hi rend='italic'>Alaska and its Resources</hi>
(London, 1870), p. 404.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Taboos
observed
by the
central
Esquimaux
after killing
sea-beasts. 
The sea-mammals
may not be
brought
into contact
with
reindeer.</note>
The central Esquimaux of Baffin Land and Hudson Bay
think that whales, ground seals, and common seals originated
in the severed fingers of the goddess Sedna. Hence an
Esquimau of these regions must make atonement for each
of these animals that he kills, and must observe strictly
certain taboos after their slaughter. Some of the rules of
conduct thus enjoined are identical with those which are in
force after the death of a human being. Thus after the
killing of one of these sea-mammals, as after the decease of
a person, it is forbidden to scrape the frost from the window,
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
to shake the bed or to disturb the shrubs under the bed, to
remove the drippings of oil from under the lamp, to scrape
hair from skins, to cut snow for the purpose of melting it,
to work on iron, wood, stone, or ivory. Furthermore, women
are forbidden to comb their hair, to wash their faces, and to
dry their boots and stockings. All these regulations must
be kept with the greatest care after a ground seal has been
killed, because the transgression of taboos that refer to this
animal makes the hands of Sedna very sore. When a seal
is brought into the hut, the women must stop working until
it is cut up. After the capture of a ground seal, walrus, or
whale, they must rest for three days. Not all kinds of work,
however, are forbidden; they may mend articles made of
sealskin, but they may not make anything new. Working
on the new skins of caribou, the American reindeer, is strictly
prohibited; for a series of rules forbids all contact between
that animal and the sea-mammals. Thus reindeer-skins
obtained in summer may not be prepared before the ice
has formed and the first seal is caught with the harpoon.
Later, as soon as the first walrus has been killed, the work
must stop again until the next autumn. Hence everybody is
eager to have his reindeer-skins ready as quickly as possible,
for until that is done the walrus season will not begin. When
the first walrus has been killed a messenger goes from village
to village and announces the news, whereupon all work on
reindeer-skins immediately ceases. On the other hand, when
the season for hunting the reindeer begins, all the winter
clothing and the winter tents that had been in use during
the walrus hunting season become tabooed and are buried
under stones; they may not be used again till the next walrus
hunting season comes round. No walrus-hide or thongs made
of such hide may be taken inland, where the reindeer live.
Venison may not be put in the same boat with walrus-meat,
nor yet with salmon. If venison or the antlers of the reindeer
were in a boat which goes walrus-hunting, the boat would be
liable to be broken by the walrus. The Esquimaux are not
allowed to eat venison and walrus on the same day, unless
they first strip naked or put on clothing of reindeer-skin that
has never been worn in hunting walrus. The transgression
of these taboos gives umbrage to the souls of walrus; and a
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
myth is told to account for the mutual aversion of the walrus
and the reindeer. And in general the Esquimaux say that
Sedna dislikes the reindeer, wherefore they may not bring
the beast into contact with her favourites, the sea-mammals.
Hence the meat of the whale and the seal, as well as of the
walrus, may not be eaten on the same day with venison. It
is not permitted that both sorts of meat lie on the floor of
the hut or behind the lamps at the same time. If a man
who has eaten venison in the morning happens to enter a
hut in which seal meat is being cooked, he is allowed to eat
venison on the bed, but it must be wrapped up before it is
carried into the hut, and he must take care to keep clear of
the floor. Before they change from one food to the other
the Esquimaux must wash themselves.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Even
among the
sea-beasts
themselves
there are
rules of
mutual
avoidance
which the
central
Esquimaux
must
observe.</note>
But even among the sea-beasts themselves there are rules
of mutual avoidance which these central Esquimaux must
observe. Thus a person who has been eating or hunting
walrus must strip naked or change his clothes before he eats
seal; otherwise the transgression will become fastened to
the soul of the walrus in a manner which will be explained
presently. Again, the soul of a salmon is very powerful,
and its body may not be eaten on the same day with walrus
or venison. Salmon may not be cooked in a pot that has
been used to boil any other kind of meat; and it must
always be cooked at some distance from the hut. The
salmon-fisher is not allowed to wear boots that have been
used in hunting walrus; and no work may be done on boot-legs
till the first salmon has been caught and put on a boot-leg.
Once more the soul of the grim polar bear is offended
if the taboos which concern him are not observed. His soul
tarries for three days near the spot where it left his body,
and during these days the Esquimaux are particularly careful
to conform rigidly to the laws of taboo, because they
believe that punishment overtakes the transgressor who sins
against the soul of a bear far more speedily than him who
sins against the souls of the sea-beasts.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, <q>The Central Eskimo,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Sixth Annual Report of the Bureau of
Ethnology</hi> (Washington, 1888), pp.
584 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 595; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> <q>The Eskimo of
Baffin Land and Hudson Bay,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin
of the American Museum of Natural
History</hi>, xv. part i. (1901) pp. 121-124.
See also <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> <q>Die Sagen der
Baffin-land Eskimo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen
der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie,
Ethnologie, und Urgeschichte</hi>
(1885), pp. 162 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, in <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings
and Transactions of the Royal Society
of Canada</hi>, v. (Montreal, 1888) section
ii. pp. 35 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; C. F. Hall, <hi rend='italic'>Life with
the Esquimaux</hi> (London, 1864), ii.
321 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the Second
Arctic Expedition made by Charles F.
Hall</hi>, edited by Professor J. E. Nourse
(Washington, 1879), pp. 191 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Native explanation
of these
Esquimau
taboos.</note>
The native explanation of the taboos thus enjoined on
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
hunters among the central Esquimaux has been given us by the
eminent American ethnologist Dr. Franz Boas. As it sets
what may be called the spiritual basis of taboo in the clearest
light, it deserves to be studied with attention.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The object
of the
taboos observed
after
killing sea-beasts
is to
prevent the
souls of the
slain animals
from
contracting
certain
attachments,
which
would hurt
not only
them, but
also the
great goddess
Sedna,
in whose
house the
disembodied
souls of the
sea-beasts
reside.</note>
The goddess Sedna, he tells us, the mother of the sea-mammals,
may be considered to be the chief deity of the
central Esquimaux. She is supposed to bear supreme
sway over the destinies of mankind, and almost all the
observances of these tribes have for their object to retain her
good will or appease her anger. Her home is in the lower
world, where she dwells in a house built of stone and whale-ribs.
<q rend='pre'>The souls of seals, ground seals, and whales are believed
to proceed from her house. After one of these animals has
been killed, its soul stays with the body for three days. Then
it goes back to Sedna's abode, to be sent forth again by her.
If, during the three days that the soul stays with the body,
any taboo or proscribed custom is violated, the violation
(<foreign rend='italic'>pitssēte</foreign>) becomes attached to the animal's soul, and causes
it pain. The soul strives in vain to free itself of these
attachments, but is compelled to take them down to Sedna.
The attachments, in some manner not explained, make her
hands sore, and she punishes the people who are the cause
of her pains by sending to them sickness, bad weather, and
starvation. If, on the other hand, all taboos have been
observed, the sea-animals will allow themselves to be caught;
they will even come to meet the hunter. The object of the
innumerable taboos that are in force after the killing of these
sea-animals, therefore, is to keep their souls free from attachments
that would hurt their souls as well as Sedna.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The souls
of the sea-beasts
have
a great
aversion to
the dark
colour of
death and
to the
vapour that
arises from
flowing
blood, and
they avoid
persons
who are
affected by
these
things.</note>
<q rend='pre'>The souls of the sea-animals are endowed with greater
powers than those of ordinary human beings. They can
see the effect of contact with a corpse, which causes objects
touched by it to appear dark in colour; and they can see
the effect of flowing human blood, from which a vapour rises
that surrounds the bleeding person and is communicated to
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
every one and every thing that comes in contact with such
a person. This vapour and the dark colour of death are
exceedingly unpleasant to the souls of the sea-animals, that
will not come near a hunter thus affected. The hunter must
therefore avoid contact with people who have touched a body,
or with those who are bleeding, more particularly with menstruating
women or with those who have recently given
birth. The hands of menstruating women appear red to the
sea-animals. If any one who has touched a body or who
is bleeding should allow others to come in contact with him,
he would cause them to become distasteful to the seals, and
therefore to Sedna as well. For this reason custom demands
that every person must at once announce if he has touched
a body, and that women must make known when they are
menstruating or when they have had a miscarriage. If they
do not do so, they will bring ill-luck to all the hunters.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The transgresser
of
a taboo
must
announce
his transgression,
in
order that
other
people may
shun him.</note>
<q rend='pre'>These ideas have given rise to the belief that it is necessary
to announce the transgression of any taboo. The transgressor
of a custom is distasteful to Sedna and to the animals,
and those who abide with him will become equally distasteful
through contact with him. For this reason it has come to
be an act required by custom and morals to confess any and
every transgression of a taboo, in order to protect the community
from the evil influence of contact with the evil-doer.
The descriptions of Eskimo life given by many observers
contain records of starvation, which, according to the belief
of the natives, was brought about by some one transgressing
a law, and not announcing what he had done.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Hence the
central
Esquimaux
have come
to think
that sin
can be
atoned for
by confession.</note>
<q rend='pre'>I presume the importance of the confession of a transgression,
with a view to warning others to keep at a distance
from the transgressor, has gradually led to the idea that a
transgression, or, we might say, a sin can be atoned for by
confession. This is one of the most remarkable traits
among the religious beliefs of the central Eskimo. There
are innumerable tales of starvation brought about by the
transgression of a taboo. In vain the hunters try to
supply their families with food; gales and drifting snow
make their endeavours fruitless. Finally the help of the
<hi rend='italic'>angakok</hi><note place='foot'>That is, the wizard or sorcerer.</note> is invoked, and he discovers that the cause of the
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>
misfortune of the people is due to the transgression of a
taboo. Then the guilty one is searched for. If he confesses,
all is well; the weather moderates, and the seals allow
themselves to be caught; but if he obstinately maintains
his innocence, his death alone will soothe the wrath of
the offended deity....</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The transgression
of taboos
affects the
soul of the
transgressor,
becoming
attached to
it and
making
him sick.
If the
attachment
is not removed
by
the wizard,
the man
will die.</note>
<q rend='pre'>The transgressions of taboos do not affect the souls of
game alone. It has already been stated that the sea-mammals
see their effect upon man also, who appears to
them of a dark colour, or surrounded by a vapour which is
invisible to ordinary man. This means, of course, that the
transgression also affects the soul of the evil-doer. It becomes
attached to it, and makes him sick. The <foreign rend='italic'>angakok</foreign><note place='foot'>That is, the wizard or sorcerer.</note>
is able to see these attachments with the help of his
guardian spirit, and is able to free the soul from them. If
this is not done, the person must die. In many cases the
transgressions become fastened also to persons who come in
contact with the evil-doer. This is especially true of
children, to whose souls the sins of their parents, and
particularly of their mothers, become readily attached.
Therefore, when a child is sick, the <foreign rend='italic'>angakok</foreign> first of all,
asks its mother if she has transgressed any taboos. The
attachment seems to have a different appearance, according
to the taboo that has been violated. A black attachment is
due to removing oil-drippings from under the lamp, a piece
of caribou-skin represents the scrapings removed from a
caribou-skin at a time when such work was forbidden. As
soon as the mother acknowledges the transgression of a taboo,
the attachment leaves the child's soul, and the child recovers.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Esquimaux
try to
keep the
sea-beasts
free from
contaminating
influences,
especially
from contact
with
corpses
and with
women
who have
recently
been
brought to
bed.</note>
<q rend='pre'>A number of customs may be explained by the
endeavours of the natives to keep the sea-mammals free
from contaminating influences. All the clothing of a dead
person, the tent in which he died, and the skins obtained by
him, must be discarded; for if a hunter should wear clothing
made of skins that had been in contact with the deceased,
these would appear dark, and the seal would avoid him.
Neither would a seal allow itself to be taken into a hut
darkened by a dead body; and all those who entered such a
hut would appear dark to it, and would be avoided.</q>
</p>

<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>While it is customary for a successful hunter to invite
all the men of the village to eat of the seal that he has
caught, they must not take any of the seal-meat out of the
hut, because it might come in contact with persons who are
under taboo, and thus the hunter might incur the displeasure
of the seal and of Sedna. This is particularly strictly
forbidden in the case of the first seal of the season.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>A woman who has a new-born child, and who has not
quite recovered, must eat only of seals caught by her husband,
by a boy, or by an aged man; else the vapour arising from
her body would become attached to the souls of other seals,
which would take the transgression down to Sedna, thus
making her hands sore.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Cases of premature birth require particularly careful
treatment. The event must be announced publicly, else dire
results will follow. If a woman should conceal from the
other people that she has had a premature birth, they might
come near her, or even eat in her hut of the seals procured
by her husband. The vapour arising from her would thus
affect them, and they would be avoided by the seals. The
transgression would also become attached to the soul of
the seal, which would take it down to Sedna.</q><note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, <q>The Eskimo of Baffin
Land and Hudson Bay,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin of
the American Museum of Natural
History</hi>, xv. pt. i. (1901) pp. 119-121,
124-126. In quoting these
passages I have changed the spelling
of a few words in accordance with
English orthography.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>In the
system of
taboos
of the
central
Esquimaux
we see
animism
passing
into
religion;
morality is
coming to
rest on a
supernatural
basis,
namely the
will of the
goddess
Sedna. In this
evolution of
religion the
practice of
confession
has played
a part.
It seems
to have
been
regarded
as a
spiritual
purge or
emetic, by
which sin,
conceived
as a sort
of morbid
substance,
was expelled
from
the body of
the sinner.</note>
In these elaborate taboos so well described by Dr. Boas
we seem to see a system of animism in the act of passing
into religion. The rules themselves bear the clearest traces
of having originated in a doctrine of souls, and of being
determined by the supposed likes and dislikes, sympathies
and antipathies of the various classes of spirits toward each
other. But above and behind the souls of men and animals
has grown up the overshadowing conception of a powerful
goddess who rules them all, so that the taboos come more
and more to be viewed as a means of propitiating her rather
than as merely adapted to suit the tastes of the souls themselves.
Thus the standard of conduct is shifted from a
natural to a supernatural basis: the supposed wish of the
deity or, as we commonly put it, the will of God, tends to supersede
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
the wishes, real or imaginative, of purely natural beings
as the measure of right and wrong. The old savage taboos,
resting on a theory of the direct relations of living creatures
to each other, remain in substance unchanged, but they are
outwardly transformed into ethical precepts with a religious
or supernatural sanction. In this gradual passage of a rude
philosophy into an elementary religion the place occupied by
confession as a moral purgative is particularly interesting.
I can hardly agree with Dr. Boas that among these
Esquimaux the confession of sins was in its origin no more
than a means of warning others against the dangerous
contagion of the sinner; in other words, that its saving
efficacy consisted merely in preventing the innocent
from suffering with the guilty, and that it had no healing
virtue, no purifying influence, for the evil-doer himself.
It seems more probable that originally the violation of
taboo, in other words, the sin, was conceived as something
almost physical, a sort of morbid substance lurking in the
sinner's body, from which it could be expelled by confession
as by a sort of spiritual purge or emetic. This is confirmed
by the form of auricular confession which is practised by
the Akikuyu of British East Africa. Amongst them, we
are told, <q>sin is essentially remissable; it suffices to confess
it. Usually this is done to the sorcerer, who expels the sin
by a ceremony of which the principal rite is a pretended
emetic: <foreign rend='italic'>kotahikio</foreign>, derived from <foreign rend='italic'>tahika</foreign>, <q>to vomit.</q></q><note place='foot'>Le P. P. Cayzac, <q>La Religion des Kikuyu,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Anthropos</hi>, v. (1905) p.
311.</note> Thus
among these savages the confession and absolution of sins is,
so to say, a purely physical process of relieving a sufferer of
a burden which sits heavy on his stomach rather than on his
conscience. This view of the matter is again confirmed by
the observation that these same Akikuyu resort to another
physical mode of expelling sin from a sinner, and that is by
the employment of a scapegoat, which by them, as by the
Jews and many other people, has been employed as a vehicle
for carting away moral rubbish and dumping it somewhere
else. For example, if a Kikuyu man has committed incest,
which would naturally entail his death, he produces a substitute
in the shape of a he-goat, to which by an ignoble ceremony
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
he transfers his guilt. Then the throat of the animal
is cut, and the human culprit is thereby purged of his sin.<note place='foot'>Le P. P. Cayzac, <hi rend='italic'>loc. cit.</hi> The
nature of the <q>ignoble ceremony</q> of
transferring sin to a he-goat is not
mentioned by the missionary. It can
hardly have been the simple Jewish one
of laying hands on the animal's head.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Hence the
confession
of sins is
employed
as a sort of
medicine
for the
recovery
of the sick. Similarly
the
confession
of sins is
sometimes
resorted
to by
women
in hard
labour as
a means of
accelerating
their
delivery. In these
cases confession
is
a magical
ceremony
designed
to relieve
the sinner.</note>
Hence we may suspect that the primary motive of the
confession of sins among savages was self-regarding; in other
words, the intention was rather to benefit the sinner himself
than to safeguard others by warning them of the danger they
would incur by coming into contact with him. This view is
borne out by the observation that confession is sometimes
used as a means of healing the sick transgressor himself, who
is supposed to recover as soon as he has made a clean breast
of his transgression. Thus <q>when the Carriers are severely
sick, they often think that they shall not recover, unless they
divulge to a priest or magician every crime which they may
have committed, which has hitherto been kept secret. In
such a case they will make a full confession, and then they
expect that their lives will be spared for a time longer. But
should they keep back a single crime, they as firmly believe
that they shall suffer almost instant death.</q><note place='foot'>D. W. Harmon, in Rev. Jedidiah
Morse's <hi rend='italic'>Report to the Secretary of War
of the United States on Indian Affairs</hi>
(New-haven, 1822), p. 345. The
Carriers are an Indian tribe of North-West
America who call themselves
<foreign rend='italic'>Ta-cul-lies</foreign>, <q>a people who go upon
water</q> (<hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> p. 343).</note> Again, the
Aurohuaca Indians, who, under the tropical sun of South
America, inhabit a chilly region bordering on the perpetual
snows of the Sierra Nevada in Colombia, believe that all
sickness is a punishment for sin. So when one of their
medicine-men is summoned to a sick bed, he does not enquire
after the patient's symptoms but makes strange passes over
him and asks in a sepulchral voice whether he will confess
his sins. If the sick man persists in drawing a veil of
silence over his frailties, the doctor will not attempt to treat
him, but will turn on his heel and leave the house. On the
other hand if a satisfactory confession has been made, the
leech directs the patient's friends to procure certain odd-looking
bits of stone or shell to which the sins of the sufferer
may be transferred, for when that is done he will be made
whole. For this purpose the sin-laden stones or shells are
carried high up into the mountains and laid in some spot
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
where the first beams of the sun, rising in clear or clouded
majesty above the long white slopes or the towering crags of
the Sierra Nevada, will strike down on them, driving sin and
sickness far away by their radiant influence.<note place='foot'>Francis C. Nicholas, <q>The Aborigines
of Santa Maria, Colombia,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>American Anthropologist</hi>, N.S. iii.
(1901) pp. 639-641.</note> Here, again,
we see that sin is regarded as something almost material
which by confession can be removed from the body of the
patient and laid on stones or shells. Further, the confession
of sins has been resorted to by some people as a means of
accelerating the birth of a child when the mother was in
hard labour. Thus, <q>among the Indians of Guatemala, in
the time of their idolatry when a woman was in labour, the
midwife ordered her to confess her sins; and if she was not
delivered, the husband was to confess his; and if that did not
do they took off his clouts and put them about his wife's
loins; if still she could not be delivered, the midwife drew
blood from herself and sprinkled it towards the four quarters
of heaven with some invocations and ceremonies.</q><note place='foot'>A. de Herrera, <hi rend='italic'>The General History
of the Vast Continent and Islands
of America</hi>, translated by Capt. J.
Stevens (London, 1725-26), iv. 148.
The confession of sins appears to
have held an important place in the
native religion of the American Indians,
particularly the Mexicans and Peruvians.
There is no sufficient reason
to suppose that they learned the
practice from Catholic priests. For
more evidence of the custom among
the aborigines of America see L. H.
Morgan, <hi rend='italic'>League of the Iroquois</hi> (Rochester,
U.S. America, 1851), pp. 170
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 187 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; B. de Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire
générale des choses de la Nouvelle
Espagne</hi>, bk. i. ch. 12, bk. vi. ch. 7,
pp. 22-27, 339-344 (Jourdanet and
Simeon's French translation); A. de
Herrera, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> iv. 173, 190; Diego
de Landa, <hi rend='italic'>Relation des choses de
Yucatan</hi> (Paris, 1864), pp. 154 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
Brasseur de Bourbourg, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire des
nations civilisées du Mexique et de
l'Amérique Centrale</hi>, ii. 114 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
567, iii. 567-569; P. J. de Arriaga,
<hi rend='italic'>Extirpacion de la idolatria del Piru</hi>
(Lima, 1621), pp. 18, 28 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In these
attempts of the Indians to accelerate the birth of the child it
seems clear that the confession of sins on the part first of the
wife and afterwards of the husband is nothing but a magical
ceremony like the putting of the husband's clothes on the
suffering woman<note place='foot'>As to this means of hastening the
delivery see <hi rend='italic'>Totemism and Exogamy</hi>,
iv. 248 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The intention of the exchange
of clothes at childbirth between
husband and wife seems to be to relieve
the woman by transferring the travail
pangs to the man.</note> or the sprinkling of the midwife's blood
towards the four quarters of the heaven. Amongst the
Antambahoaka, a savage tribe of Madagascar, when a woman
is in hard labour, a sorcerer is called in to her aid. After
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
making some magical signs and uttering some incantations,
he generally declares that the patient cannot be delivered
until she has publicly confessed a secret fault which she has
committed. In such a case a woman has been known to
confess to incest with her brother; and immediately after
her confession the child was born.<note place='foot'>G. Ferrand, <hi rend='italic'>Les Musulmans à
Madagascar</hi>, Deuxième Partie (Paris,
1893), pp. 20 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In these cases the confession
of sins is clearly not a mode of warning people to
keep clear of the sinner; it is a magical ceremony primarily
intended to benefit the sinner himself or herself and no
other. The same thing may perhaps be said of a confession
which was prescribed in a certain case by ancient Hindoo
ritual. At a great festival of Varuna, which fell at the
beginning of the rainy season, the priest asked the wife of
the sacrificer to name her paramour or paramours, and she
had to mention their names or at least to take up as many
grass-stalks as she had lovers.<note place='foot'>H. Oldenberg, <hi rend='italic'>Die Religion des
Veda</hi> (Berlin, 1894), pp. 319 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> <q>Now when a woman who
belongs to one man carries on intercourse with another, she
undoubtedly commits a sin against Varuna. He therefore
thus asks her, lest she should sacrifice with a secret pang in
her mind; for when confessed the sin becomes less, since it
becomes truth; this is why he thus asks her. And whatever
connection she confesses not, that indeed will turn out
injurious to her relatives.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Satapatha Brahmana</hi>, translated
by J. Eggeling, pt. i. p. 397 (<hi rend='italic'>Sacred
Books of the East</hi>, vol. xii.).</note> In this passage of the <hi rend='italic'>Satapatha
Brahmana</hi> confession of sin is said to diminish the
sin, just as if the mere utterance of the words ejected or
expelled some morbid matter from the person of the sinner,
thereby relieving her of its burden and benefiting also her
relatives, who would suffer through any sin which she might
not have confessed.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Thus the
confession
of sins is
at first
rather a
bodily than
a moral
purgation,
resembling
the ceremonies of
washing,
fumigation,
and so on,
which are
observed
by many
primitive
peoples
for the
removal
of sin.</note>
Thus at an early stage of culture the confession of sins
wears the aspect of a bodily rather than of a moral and
spiritual purgation; it is a magical rather than a religious
rite, and as such it resembles the ceremonies of washing,
scouring, fumigation, and so forth, which in like manner
are applied by many primitive peoples to the purification
of what we should regard as moral guilt, but what they
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
consider rather as a corporeal pollution or infection, which
can be removed by the physical agencies of fire, water,
fasts, purgatives, abrasion, scarification, and so forth. But
when the guilt of sin ceases to be regarded as something
material, a sort of clinging vapour of death, and is conceived
as the transgression of the will of a wise and good God, it
is obvious that the observance of these outward rites of
purification becomes superfluous and absurd, a vain show
which cannot appease the anger of the offended deity. The
only means of turning away his wrath and averting the fatal
consequences of sin is now believed to be the humble confession
and true repentance of the sinner. At this stage of
ethical evolution the practice of confession loses its old
magical character as a bodily purge and assumes the new
aspect of a purely religious rite, the propitiation of a great
supernatural and moral being, who by a simple fiat can
cancel the transgression and restore the transgressor to
a state of pristine innocence. This comfortable doctrine
teaches us that in order to blot out the effects of our
misdeeds we have only to acknowledge and confess them
with a lowly and penitent heart, whereupon a merciful
God will graciously pardon our sin and absolve us and ours
from its consequences. It might indeed be well for the
world if we could thus easily undo the past, if we could
recall the words that have been spoken amiss, if we could
arrest the long train that follows, like a flight of avenging
Furies, on every evil action. But this we cannot do.
Our words and acts, good and bad, have their natural,
their inevitable consequences. God may pardon sin, but
Nature cannot.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>It is
possible
that some
savage
taboos may
still lurk,
under
various
disguises,
in the
morality of
civilised
peoples.</note>
It seems not improbable that in our own rules of conduct,
in what we call the common decencies of life as well as in
the weightier matters of morality, there may survive not a
few old savage taboos which, masquerading as an expression
of the divine will or draped in the flowing robes of a false
philosophy, have maintained their credit long after the crude
ideas out of which they sprang have been discarded by the
progress of thought and knowledge; while on the other hand
many ethical precepts and social laws, which now rest firmly
on a solid basis of utility, may at first have drawn some
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
portion of their sanctity from the same ancient system of
superstition. For example, we can hardly doubt that in
primitive society the crime of murder derived much of its
horror from a fear of the angry ghost of the murdered man.
Thus superstition may serve as a convenient crutch to
morality till she is strong enough to throw away the crutch
and walk alone. To judge by the legislation of the
Pentateuch the ancient Semites appear to have passed
through a course of moral evolution not unlike that which
we can still detect in process among the Esquimaux of
Baffin Land. Some of the old laws of Israel are clearly
savage taboos of a familiar type thinly disguised as commands
of the deity. This disguise is indeed a good deal
more perfect in Palestine than in Baffin Land, but in
substance it is the same. Among the Esquimaux it is
the will of Sedna; among the Israelites it is the will of
Jehovah.<note place='foot'>The similarity of some of the
Mosaic laws to savage customs has
struck most Europeans who have acquired
an intimate knowledge of the
savage and his ways. They have often
explained the coincidences as due to a
primitive revelation or to the dispersion
of the Jews into all parts of the earth.
Some examples of these coincidences
were cited in my article <q>Taboo,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia Britannica</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>9</hi> xxiii. 17.
The subject has since been handled,
with consummate ability and learning,
by my lamented friend W. Robertson
Smith in his <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the Semites</hi>
(New Edition, London, 1894). In
<hi rend='italic'>Psyche's Task</hi> I have illustrated by
examples the influence of superstition
on the growth of morality.</note>
</p>

<p>
But it is time to return to our immediate subject, to wit,
the rules of conduct observed by hunters after the slaughter
of the game.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremonies
observed
by the
Kayans
after killing
a panther. Ceremonies
of
purification
observed
by African
hunters
after killing
dangerous
beasts. Ceremonies
observed
by
Lapp
hunters
after killing
a bear.</note>
When the Kayans or Bahaus of central Borneo have shot
one of the dreaded Bornean panthers, they are very anxious
about the safety of their souls, for they think that the soul
of a panther is almost more powerful than their own. Hence
they step eight times over the carcase of the dead beast
reciting the spell, <q>Panther, thy soul under my soul.</q> On
returning home they smear themselves, their dogs, and their
weapons with the blood of fowls in order to calm their souls
and hinder them from fleeing away; for being themselves
fond of the flesh of fowls they ascribe the same taste to
their souls. For eight days afterwards they must bathe by
day and by night before going out again to the chase.<note place='foot'>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>Quer durch
Borneo</hi>, i. 106 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
After killing an animal some Indian hunters used to
purify themselves in water as a religious rite.<note place='foot'>J. Adair, <hi rend='italic'>History of the American
Indians</hi>, p. 118.</note> When a
Damara hunter returns from a successful chase he takes
water in his mouth and ejects it three times over his feet,
and also into the fire on his own hearth.<note place='foot'>C. J. Andersson, <hi rend='italic'>Lake Ngami</hi>, p.
224.</note> Amongst the
Caffres of South Africa <q>the slaughter of a lion, however
honourable it is esteemed, is nevertheless associated with an
idea of moral uncleanness, and is followed by a very strange
ceremony. When the hunters approach the village on their
return, the man who gave the lion the first wound is hidden
from every eye by the shields which his comrades hold up
before him. One of the hunters steps forward and, leaping
and bounding in a strange manner, praises the courage of
the lion-killer. Then he rejoins the band, and the same
performance is repeated by another. All the rest meanwhile
keep up a ceaseless shouting, rattling with their clubs on
their shields. This goes on till they have reached the village.
Then a mean hut is run up not far from the village; and in
this hut the lion-killer, because he is unclean, must remain
four days, cut off from all association with the tribe. There
he dyes his body all over with white paint; and lads who
have not yet been circumcised, and are therefore, in respect
to uncleanness, in the same state as himself, bring him a calf
to eat, and wait upon him. When the four days are over,
the unclean man washes himself, paints himself with red
paint in the usual manner, and is escorted back to the village
by the head chief, attended with a guard of honour. Lastly,
a second calf is killed; and, the uncleanness being now at
an end, every one is free to eat of the calf with him.</q><note place='foot'>L. Alberti, <hi rend='italic'>De Kaffers aan de
Zuidkust van Afrika</hi> (Amsterdam,
1810), pp. 158 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare H.
Lichtenstein, <hi rend='italic'>Reisen im südlichen
Africa</hi> (Berlin, 1811-12), i. 419.
These accounts were written about a
century ago. The custom may since
have become obsolete. A similar remark
applies to other customs described
in this and the following paragraph.</note>
Among the Hottentots, when a man has killed a lion, leopard,
elephant, or rhinoceros he is esteemed a great hero, but he
is deluged with urine by the medicine-man and has to remain
at home quite idle for three days, during which his wife may
not come near him; she is also enjoined to restrict herself
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
to a poor diet and to eat no more than is barely necessary
to keep her in health.<note place='foot'>P. Kolbe, <hi rend='italic'>Present State of the Cape
of Good Hope</hi>, I.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (London, 1738) pp.
251-255. The reason alleged for the
custom is to allow the slayer to recruit
his strength. But the reason is clearly
inadequate as an explanation of this and
similar practices.</note> Similarly the Lapps deem it the
height of glory to kill a bear, which they consider the king
of beasts. Nevertheless, all the men who take part in the
slaughter are regarded as unclean, and must live by themselves
for three days in a hut or tent made specially for
them, where they cut up and cook the bear's carcase. The
reindeer which brought in the carcase on a sledge may not
be driven by a woman for a whole year; indeed, according
to one account, it may not be used by anybody for that
period. Before the men go into the tent where they are to
be secluded, they strip themselves of the garments they had
worn in killing the bear, and their wives spit the red juice of
alder bark in their faces. They enter the tent not by the
ordinary door but by an opening at the back. When the
bear's flesh has been cooked, a portion of it is sent by the
hands of two men to the women, who may not approach the
men's tent while the cooking is going on. The men who
convey the flesh to the women pretend to be strangers
bringing presents from a foreign land; the women keep up
the pretence and promise to tie red threads round the legs
of the strangers. The bear's flesh may not be passed in to
the women through the door of their tent, but must be thrust
in at a special opening made by lifting up the hem of the
tent-cover. When the three days' seclusion is over and the
men are at liberty to return to their wives, they run, one
after the other, round the fire, holding the chain by which
pots are suspended over it. This is regarded as a form of
purification; they may now leave the tent by the ordinary
door and rejoin the women. But the leader of the party
must still abstain from cohabitation with his wife for two
days more.<note place='foot'>J. Scheffer, <hi rend='italic'>Lapponia</hi> (Frankfort,
1673), pp. 234-243; C. Leemius, <hi rend='italic'>De
Lapponibus Finmarchiae eorumque
lingua, vita et religione pristina commentatio</hi>
(Copenhagen, 1767), pp.
502 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. J. Jessen, <hi rend='italic'>De Finnorum
Lapponumque Nouvegicorum religione
pagana tractatus singularis</hi>, pp. 64 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
(bound up with Leemius's work).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Expiatory
ceremonies
performed
for the
slaughter
of serpents.</note>
Again, the Caffres are said to dread greatly the boa-constrictor
or an enormous serpent resembling it; <q>and being
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
influenced by certain superstitious notions they even fear to
kill it. The man who happened to put it to death, whether
in self-defence or otherwise, was formerly required to lie in
a running stream of water during the day for several
weeks together; and no beast whatever was allowed to be
slaughtered at the hamlet to which he belonged, until this
duty had been fully performed. The body of the snake was
then taken and carefully buried in a trench, dug close to the
cattle-fold, where its remains, like those of a chief, were
henceforward kept perfectly undisturbed. The period of
penance, as in the case of mourning for the dead, is now
happily reduced to a few days.</q><note place='foot'>S. Kay, <hi rend='italic'>Travels and Researches in
Caffraria</hi> (London, 1833), pp. 341 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Amongst the Ewe-speaking
peoples of the Slave Coast, who worship the python, a native
who killed one of these serpents used to be burned alive.
But for some time past, though a semblance of carrying out
the old penalty is preserved, the culprit is allowed to escape
with his life, but he has to pay a heavy fine. A small hut
of dry faggots and grass is set up, generally near the lagoon
at Whydah, if the crime has been perpetrated there; the
guilty man is thrust inside, the door of plaited grass is shut
on him, and the hut is set on fire. Sometimes a dog, a kid,
and two fowls are enclosed along with him, and he is
drenched with palm-oil and yeast, probably to render him
the more combustible. As he is unbound, he easily breaks
out of the frail hut before the flames consume him; but he
has to run the gauntlet of the angry serpent-worshippers,
who belabour the murderer of their god with sticks and
pelt him with clods until he reaches water and plunges
into it, which is supposed to wash away his sin. Thirteen
days later a commemoration service is held in honour
of the deceased python.<note place='foot'>J. Duncan, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in Western
Africa</hi> (London, 1847), i. 195 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
F. E. Forbes, <hi rend='italic'>Dahomey and the
Dahomans</hi> (London, 1851), i. 107; P.
Bouche, <hi rend='italic'>La Côte des Esclaves</hi> (Paris,
1885), p. 397; A. B. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>The Ewe-speaking
Peoples of the Slave Coast</hi>, pp.
58 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Madras it is considered a
great sin to kill a cobra. When this has happened, the
people generally burn the body of the serpent just as they
burn the bodies of human beings. The murderer deems
himself polluted for three days. On the second day milk
is poured on the remains of the cobra. On the third
<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>
day the guilty wretch is free from pollution.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>, xxi. (1892) p.
224. Many of the above examples of
expiation exacted for the slaughter of
animals have already been cited by me
in a note on Pausanias, ii. 7. 7, where
I suggested that the legendary purification
of Apollo for the slaughter of the
python at Delphi (Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest.
Graec.</hi>, 12; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>De defectu oraculorum</hi>,
15; Aelian, <hi rend='italic'>Var. Hist.</hi> iii. 1) may be
a reminiscence of a custom of this sort.</note> Under native
rule, we may suspect, he would not get off so lightly.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>All such
expiatory
rites are
based on
the respect
which the
savage
feels for
the souls of
animals.</note>
In these last cases the animal whose slaughter has to be
atoned for is sacred, that is, it is one whose life is commonly
spared from motives of superstition. Yet the treatment of
the sacrilegious slayer seems to resemble so closely the treatment
of hunters and fishermen who have killed animals for
food in the ordinary course of business, that the ideas on
which both sets of customs are based may be assumed to
be substantially the same. Those ideas, if I am right,
are the respect which the savage feels for the souls
of beasts, especially valuable or formidable beasts, and
the dread which he entertains of their vengeful ghosts.
Some confirmation of this view may be drawn from the
ceremonies observed by fishermen of Annam when the carcase
of a whale is washed ashore. These fisherfolk, we are told,
worship the whale on account of the benefits they derive from
it. There is hardly a village on the sea-shore which has not
its small pagoda, containing the bones, more or less authentic,
of a whale. When a dead whale is washed ashore, the people
accord it a solemn burial. The man who first caught sight
of it acts as chief mourner, performing the rites which as
chief mourner and heir he would perform for a human kinsman.
He puts on all the garb of woe, the straw hat, the
white robe with long sleeves turned inside out, and the other
paraphernalia of full mourning. As next of kin to the
deceased he presides over the funeral rites. Perfumes are
burned, sticks of incense kindled, leaves of gold and silver
scattered, crackers let off. When the flesh has been cut off
and the oil extracted, the remains of the carcase are buried
in the sand. Afterwards a shed is set up and offerings are
made in it. Usually some time after the burial the spirit of
the dead whale takes possession of some person in the village
and declares by his mouth whether he is a male or a female.<note place='foot'>Le R. P. Cadière, <q>Croyances et
dictons populaires de la Vallée du
Nguôn-son, Province de Quang-binh
(Annam),</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de l'École Française
d'Extrême Orient</hi>, i. (1901) pp. 183 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V. Tabooed Things.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. The meaning of Taboo.'/>
<head>§ 1. The Meaning of Taboo.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Taboos of
holiness
agree with
taboos of
pollution,
because in
the savage
mind the
ideas of
holiness
and pollution
are
not yet
differentiated.</note>
Thus in primitive society the rules of ceremonial purity
observed by divine kings, chiefs, and priests agree in many
respects with the rules observed by homicides, mourners,
women in childbed, girls at puberty, hunters and fishermen,
and so on. To us these various classes of persons appear to
differ totally in character and condition; some of them we
should call holy, others we might pronounce unclean and
polluted. But the savage makes no such moral distinction
between them; the conceptions of holiness and pollution are
not yet differentiated in his mind. To him the common
feature of all these persons is that they are dangerous and
in danger, and the danger in which they stand and to which
they expose others is what we should call spiritual or ghostly,
and therefore imaginary. The danger, however, is not less
real because it is imaginary; imagination acts upon man as
really as does gravitation, and may kill him as certainly as a
dose of prussic acid. To seclude these persons from the rest
of the world so that the dreaded spiritual danger shall neither
reach them, nor spread from them, is the object of the taboos
which they have to observe. These taboos act, so to say,
as electrical insulators to preserve the spiritual force with
which these persons are charged from suffering or inflicting
harm by contact with the outer world.<note place='foot'>On the nature of taboo see my
article <q>Taboo</q> in the <hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia
Britannica</hi>, 9th edition, vol. xxiii. (1888)
pp. 15 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; W. Robertson Smith, <hi rend='italic'>Religion
of the Semites</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (London, 1894), pp.
148 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 446 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Some languages
have retained a word for that general
idea which includes under it the notions
which we now distinguish as sanctity
and pollution. The word in Latin is
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sacer</foreign>, in Greek, ἅγιος. In Polynesian
it is <foreign rend='italic'>tabu</foreign> (Tongan), <foreign rend='italic'>tapu</foreign> (Samoan,
Tahitian, Marquesan, Maori, etc.), or
<foreign rend='italic'>kapu</foreign> (Hawaiian). See E. Tregear,
<hi rend='italic'>Maori-Polynesian Comparative Dictionary</hi>
(Wellington, N.Z., 1891), <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
<foreign rend='italic'>tapu</foreign>. In Dacotan the word is <foreign rend='italic'>wakan</foreign>,
which in Riggs's <hi rend='italic'>Dakota-English Dictionary</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Contributions to North American
Ethnology</hi>, vol. vii., Washington,
1890, pp. 507 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>) is defined as <q><emph>spiritual</emph>,
<emph>sacred</emph>, <emph>consecrated</emph>; <emph>wonderful</emph>, <emph>incomprehensible</emph>;
said also of women at the
menstrual period.</q> Another writer
in the same dictionary defines <foreign rend='italic'>wakan</foreign>
more fully as follows: <q><emph>Mysterious</emph>;
<emph>incomprehensible</emph>; <emph>in a peculiar state,
which, from not being understood, it is
dangerous to meddle with</emph>; hence the
application of this word to women at
the <emph>menstrual period</emph>, and from hence,
too, arises the feeling among the
wilder Indians, that if the Bible, the
church, the missionary, etc., are
<q>wakan,</q> they are to be <emph>avoided</emph>, or
<emph>shunned</emph>, not as being <emph>bad</emph> or <emph>dangerous</emph>,
but as wakan. The word seems to be
the only one suitable for <emph>holy</emph>, <emph>sacred</emph>,
etc., but the common acceptation of it,
given above, makes it quite misleading
to the <emph>heathen</emph>.</q> On the notion designated
by <foreign rend='italic'>wakan</foreign>, see also G. H. Pond,
<q>Dakota Superstitions,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Collections of
the Minnesota Historical Society for
the year 1867</hi> (Saint Paul, 1867), p.
33; J. Owen Dorsey, in <hi rend='italic'>Eleventh
Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</hi>
(Washington, 1894), pp. 366 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
It is characteristic of the equivocal
notion denoted by these terms that,
whereas the condition of women in
childbed is commonly regarded by the
savage as what we should call unclean,
among the Herero the same condition
is described as holy; for some
time after the birth of her child, the
woman is secluded in a hut made
specially for her, and every morning
the milk of all the cows is brought to
her that she may consecrate it by
touching it with her mouth. See H.
Schinz, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsch-Südwest-Afrika</hi>, p.
167. Again, whereas a girl at puberty is
commonly secluded as dangerous, among
the Warundi of eastern Africa she is led
by her grandmother all over the house
and obliged to touch everything (O. Baumann,
<hi rend='italic'>Durch Massailand sur Nilquelle</hi>
(Berlin, 1894), p. 221), as if her touch
imparted a blessing instead of a curse.</note>
</p>

<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>

<p>
To the illustrations of these general principles which
have been already given I shall now add some more, drawing
my examples, first, from the class of tabooed things, and,
second, from the class of tabooed words; for in the opinion
of the savage both things and words may, like persons, be
charged or electrified, either temporarily or permanently,
with the mysterious virtue of taboo, and may therefore
require to be banished for a longer or shorter time from the
familiar usage of common life. And the examples will be
chosen with special reference to those sacred chiefs, kings
and priests, who, more than anybody else, live fenced about
by taboo as by a wall. Tabooed things will be illustrated
in the present chapter, and tabooed words in the next.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. Iron tabooed.'/>
<head>§ 2. Iron tabooed.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Kings may
not be
touched.
The use of
iron forbidden
to
kings and
priests. Use of iron
forbidden
at circumcision,
childbirth,
and so
forth. Use of iron
forbidden
at certain
times and
places
among the
Esquimaux. Use of iron
forbidden
on certain
occasions
among
the Highlanders
of
Scotland. Iron not
used in
building
sacred
edifices.</note>
In the first place we may observe that the awful
sanctity of kings naturally leads to a prohibition to
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>
touch their sacred persons. Thus it was unlawful to lay
hands on the person of a Spartan king;<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Agis</hi>, 19.</note> no one might
touch the body of the king or queen of Tahiti;<note place='foot'>W. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>Polynesian Researches</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
iii. 102.</note> it is
forbidden to touch the person of the king of Siam under
pain of death;<note place='foot'>E. Aymonier, <hi rend='italic'>Le Cambodge</hi>, ii.
(Paris, 1901) p. 25.</note> and no one may touch the king of
Cambodia, for any purpose whatever, without his express
command. In July 1874 the king was thrown from his
carriage and lay insensible on the ground, but not one
of his suite dared to touch him; a European coming to the
spot carried the injured monarch to his palace.<note place='foot'>J. Moura, <hi rend='italic'>Le Royaume du Cambodge</hi>
(Paris, 1883), i. 226.</note> Formerly
no one might touch the king of Corea; and if he deigned
to touch a subject, the spot touched became sacred, and the
person thus honoured had to wear a visible mark (generally
a cord of red silk) for the rest of his life. Above all, no iron
might touch the king's body. In 1800 King Tieng-tsong-tai-oang
died of a tumour in the back, no one dreaming of
employing the lancet, which would probably have saved his
life. It is said that one king suffered terribly from an
abscess in the lip, till his physician called in a jester, whose
pranks made the king laugh heartily, and so the abscess
burst.<note place='foot'>Ch. Dallet, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de l'Église de
Corée</hi> (Paris, 1874), i. pp. xxiv. <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
W. E. Griffis, <hi rend='italic'>Corea, the Hermit Nation</hi>
(London, 1882), p. 219. These
customs are now obsolete (G. N.
Curzon, <hi rend='italic'>Problems of the Far East</hi>
(Westminster, 1896), pp. 154 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
note).</note> Roman and Sabine priests might not be shaved with
iron but only with bronze razors or shears;<note place='foot'>Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> v. 19. 13; Servius
on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> i. 448; Joannes
Lydus, <hi rend='italic'>De mensibus</hi>, i. 31. We have
already seen (p. <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>) that the hair of
the Flamen Dialis might only be cut
with a bronze knife. The Greeks
attributed a certain cleansing virtue to
bronze; hence they employed it in
expiatory rites, at eclipses, etc. See
the Scholiast on Theocritus, ii. 36.</note> and whenever
an iron graving-tool was brought into the sacred grove of
the Arval Brothers at Rome for the purpose of cutting an
inscription in stone, an expiatory sacrifice of a lamb and a
pig must be offered, which was repeated when the graving-tool
was removed from the grove.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Acta Fratrum Arvalium</hi>, ed. G.
Henzen (Berlin, 1874), pp. 128-135; J.
Marquardt, <hi rend='italic'>Römische Staatsverwaltung</hi>,
iii.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Das Sacralwesen</hi>) pp. 459 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> As a general rule iron might
not be brought into Greek sanctuaries.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Praecepta gerendae reipublicae</hi>,
xxvi. 7. Plutarch here mentions
that gold was also excluded from
some temples. At first sight this is
surprising, for in general neither the
gods nor their ministers have displayed
any marked aversion to gold. But a
little enquiry suffices to clear up the
mystery and set the scruple in its proper
light. From a Greek inscription discovered
some years ago we learn that no
person might enter the sanctuary of the
Mistress at Lycosura wearing golden
trinkets, unless for the purpose of dedicating
them to the goddess; and if any
one did enter the holy place with such
ornaments on his body but no such
pious intention in his mind, the trinkets
were forfeited to the use of religion.
See Ἐφημερὶς ἀρχαιολογική (Athens,
1898), col. 249; Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge
inscriptionum Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 939.
The similar rule, that in the procession
at the mysteries of Andania no woman
might wear golden ornaments (Dittenberger,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> No. 653), was probably
subject to a similar exception and enforced
by a similar penalty. Once
more, if the maidens who served Athena
on the Acropolis at Athens put on gold
ornaments, the ornaments became
sacred, in other words, the property
of the goddess (Harpocration, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
ἀρρηφορεῖν, vol. i. p. 59, ed. Dindorf).
Thus it appears that the pious scruple
about gold was concerned rather with
its exit from, than with its entrance
into, the sacred edifice. At the sacrifice
to the Sun in ancient Egypt
worshippers were forbidden to wear
golden trinkets and to give hay to
an ass (Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 30)&mdash;a
singular combination of religious precepts.
In India gold and silver are
common totems, and members of such
clans are forbidden to wear gold and
silver trinkets respectively. See
<hi rend='italic'>Totemism and Exogamy</hi>, iv. 24.</note> In Crete sacrifices
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
were offered to Menedemus without the use of iron, because
the legend ran that Menedemus had been killed by an iron
weapon in the Trojan war.<note place='foot'>Callimachus, referred to by the
Old Scholiast on Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Ibis</hi>. See
<hi rend='italic'>Callimachea</hi>, ed. O. Schneider, ii. p.
282, Frag. 100<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi> E.; Chr. A. Lobeck,
<hi rend='italic'>Aglaophamus</hi>, p. 686.</note> The Archon of Plataea might
not touch iron; but once a year, at the annual commemoration
of the men who fell at the battle of Plataea, he was
allowed to carry a sword wherewith to sacrifice a bull.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Aristides</hi>, 21. This
passage was pointed out to me by my
friend Mr. W. Wyse.</note> To
this day a Hottentot priest never uses an iron knife, but
always a sharp splint of quartz, in sacrificing an animal or
circumcising a lad.<note place='foot'>Theophilus Hahn, <hi rend='italic'>Tsuni-Goam,
the Supreme Being of the Khoi-Khoi</hi>
(London, 1881), p. 22.</note> Among the Ovambo of south-west
Africa custom requires that lads should be circumcised with
a sharp flint; if none is to hand, the operation may be performed
with iron, but the iron must afterwards be buried.<note place='foot'>Dr. P. H. Brincker, <q>Charakter,
Sitten und Gebräuche speciell der
Bantu Deutsch-Südwestafrikas,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen
des Seminars für orientalische
Sprachen zu Berlin</hi>, iii. (1900)
Dritte Abtheilung, p. 80.</note>
The Antandroy and Tanala of Madagascar cut the navel-strings
of their children with sharp wood or with a thread,
but never with an iron knife.<note place='foot'>A. van Gennep, <hi rend='italic'>Tabou et totémisme
à Madagascar</hi> (Paris, 1904), p. 38.</note> In Uap, one of the Caroline
Islands, wood of the hibiscus tree, which was used to make
the fire-drill, must be cut with shell knives or shell
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
axes, never with iron or steel.<note place='foot'>W. H. Furness, <hi rend='italic'>The Island of
Stone Money, Uap of the Carolines</hi>
(Philadelphia and London, 1910), p.
151.</note> Amongst the Moquis
of Arizona stone knives, hatchets, and so on have passed
out of common use, but are retained in religious ceremonies.<note place='foot'>J. G. Bourke, <hi rend='italic'>The Snake Dance of
the Moquis of Arizona</hi> (New York,
1891), pp. 178 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
After the Pawnees had ceased to use stone
arrow-heads for ordinary purposes, they still employed
them to slay the sacrifices, whether human captives or
buffalo and deer.<note place='foot'>G. B. Grinnell, <hi rend='italic'>Pawnee Hero
Stories and Folk-tales</hi> (New York,
1889), p. 253.</note> We have seen that among the Esquimaux
of Bering Strait the use of iron implements is forbidden
for four days after the slaughter of a white whale, and
that the use of an iron axe at a place where salmon are being
dressed is believed by these people to be a fatal imprudence.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
They hold a festival in the assembly-house of the village,
while the bladders of the slain beasts are hanging there,
and during its celebration no wood may be cut with an iron
axe. If it is necessary to split firewood, this may be done
with wedges of bone.<note place='foot'>E. W. Nelson, <q>The Eskimo
about Bering Strait,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Eighteenth Annual
Report of the Bureau of American
Ethnology</hi>, Part I. (Washington, 1899)
p. 392.</note> At Kushunuk, near Cape Vancouver,
it happened that Mr. Nelson and his party entered an
assembly-house of these Esquimaux while the festival of
the bladders was in progress. <q>When our camping outfit
was brought in from the sledges, two men took drums, and
as the clothing and goods of the traders who were with me
were brought in, the drums were beaten softly and a song
was sung in a low, humming tone, but when our guns and
some steel traps were brought in, with other articles of iron,
the drums were beaten loudly and the songs raised in proportion.
This was done that the shades of the animals
present in the bladders might not be frightened.</q><note place='foot'>E. W. Nelson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 383.</note> The
Esquimaux on the western coast of Hudson Bay may not
work on iron during the season for hunting musk-oxen,
which falls in March. And no such work may be done by
them until the seals have their pups.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, <q>The Eskimo of Baffin
Land and Hudson Bay,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin of
the American Museum of Natural
History</hi>, xv. Part I. (1901) p. 149.</note> Negroes of the Gold
Coast remove all iron or steel from their person when they
<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>
consult their fetish.<note place='foot'>C. F. Gordon Cumming, <hi rend='italic'>In the
Hebrides</hi> (ed. 1883), p. 195.</note> The men who made the need-fire in
Scotland had to divest themselves of all metal.<note place='foot'>James Logan, <hi rend='italic'>The Scottish Gael</hi>
(ed. Alex. Stewart), ii. 68 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> There was
hardly any belief, we are told, that had a stronger hold on
the mind of a Scottish Highlander than that on no account
whatever should iron be put in the ground on Good Friday.
Hence no grave was dug and no field ploughed on that day.
It has been suggested that the belief was based on that
rooted aversion to iron which fairies are known to feel.
These touchy beings live underground, and might resent
having the roof pulled from over their heads on the hallowed
day.<note place='foot'>J. G. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Witchcraft and
Second Sight in the Highlands and
Islands of Scotland</hi> (Glasgow, 1902),
pp. 262, 298, 299.</note> Again, in the Highlands of Scotland the shoulder-blades
of sheep are employed in divination, being consulted
as to future marriages, births, deaths, and funerals; but the
forecasts thus made will not be accurate unless the flesh has
been removed from the bones without the use of any iron.<note place='foot'>R. C. Maclagan, M.D., <q>Notes
on Folklore Objects from Argyleshire,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, vi. (1895) p. 157; J. G.
Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Superstitions of the Highlands
and Islands of Scotland</hi> (Glasgow,
1900), pp. 263-266. The shoulder-blades
of sheep have been used in
divination by many peoples, for example
by the Corsicans, South Slavs,
Tartars, Kirghiz, Calmucks, Chukchees,
and Lolos, as well as by the Scotch.
See J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>,
iii. 339 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (Bohn's ed.); Sir John
Lubbock (Lord Avebury), <hi rend='italic'>Origin of
Civilisation</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> pp. 237 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Ch. Rogers,
<hi rend='italic'>Social Life in Scotland</hi>, iii. 224;
Camden, <hi rend='italic'>Britannia</hi>, translated by
E. Gibson (London, 1695), col. 1046;
M. MacPhail, <q>Traditions, Customs,
and Superstitions of the Lewis,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>,
vi. (1895) p. 167; J. G. Dalyell,
<hi rend='italic'>Darker Superstitions of Scotland</hi>, pp.
515 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; F. Gregorovius, <hi rend='italic'>Corsica</hi>,
(London, 1855), p. 187; F. S. Krauss,
<hi rend='italic'>Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der
Südslaven</hi>, pp. 166-170; M. E. Durham,
<hi rend='italic'>High Albania</hi> (London, 1909),
pp. 104 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; E. Doutté, <hi rend='italic'>Magie et
religion dans l'Afrique du Nord</hi>
(Algiers, 1908), p. 371; W. Radloff,
<hi rend='italic'>Proben der Volksliteratur der türkischen
Stämme Süd-Sibiriens</hi>, iii. 115,
note 1, compare p. 132; J. Grimm,
<hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii. 932; W. W.
Rockhill, <hi rend='italic'>The Land of the Lamas</hi>
(London, 1891), pp. 176, 341-344;
P. S. Pallas, <hi rend='italic'>Reise durch verschiedene
Provinzen des russischen Reichs</hi>, i.
393; J. G. Georgi, <hi rend='italic'>Beschreibung aller
Nationen des russischen Reichs</hi>, p.
223; T. de Pauly, <hi rend='italic'>Description ethnographique
des peuples de la Russie,
peuples de la Sibérie orientale</hi> (St.
Petersburg, 1862), p. 7; Krahmer,
<q>Der Anadyr-Bezirk nach A. W.
Olssufjew,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Petermann's Mittheilungen</hi>,
xlv. (1899) pp. 230 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. Bogoras,
<q>The Chuckchee Religion,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Memoir
of the American Museum of Natural
History, The Jesup North Pacific
Expedition</hi>, vol. vii. part ii. (Leyden and
New York) pp. 487 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Crabouillet,
<q>Les Lolos,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Missions Catholiques</hi>, v.
(1873) p. 72; W. G. Aston, <hi rend='italic'>Shinto</hi>,
p. 339; R. Andree, <q>Scapulimantia,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Boas Anniversary Volume</hi> (New
York, 1906), pp. 143-165.</note>
In making the <foreign rend='italic'>clavie</foreign> (a kind of Yule-tide fire-wheel) at
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>
Burghead, no hammer may be used; the hammering must
be done with a stone.<note place='foot'>C. F. Gordon Cumming, <hi rend='italic'>In the
Hebrides</hi>, p. 226; E. J. Guthrie, <hi rend='italic'>Old
Scottish Customs</hi> (London and Glasgow,
1885), p. 223.</note> Amongst the Jews no iron tool was
used in building the Temple at Jerusalem or in making an
altar.<note place='foot'>1 Kings vi. 7; Exodus xx. 25.</note> The old wooden bridge (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pons Sublicius</foreign>) at Rome,
which was considered sacred, was made and had to be kept
in repair without the use of iron or bronze.<note place='foot'>Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <hi rend='italic'>Antiquit.
Roman.</hi> iii. 45, v. 24; Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Numa</hi>, 9; Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xxxvi. 100.</note> It was
expressly provided by law that the temple of Jupiter Liber
at Furfo might be repaired with iron tools.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Acta Fratrum Arvalium</hi>, ed. G.
Henzen, p. 132; <hi rend='italic'>Corpus Inscriptionum
Latinarum</hi>, i. No. 603.</note> The council
chamber at Cyzicus was constructed of wood without any
iron nails, the beams being so arranged that they could be
taken out and replaced.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xxxvi. 100.</note> The late Rajah Vijyanagram, a
member of the Viceroy's Council, and described as one of
the most enlightened and estimable of Hindoo princes, would
not allow iron to be used in the construction of buildings
within his territory, believing that its use would inevitably
be followed by small-pox and other epidemics.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>, x. (1881) p. 364.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Everything
new excites
the awe
and fear
of the
savage.</note>
This superstitious objection to iron perhaps dates from
that early time in the history of society when iron was still
a novelty, and as such was viewed by many with suspicion
and dislike.<note place='foot'>Prof. W. Ridgeway ingeniously
suggests that the magical virtue of iron
may be based on an observation of its
magnetic power, which would lead
savages to imagine that it was possessed
of a spirit. See <hi rend='italic'>Report of the British
Association for 1903</hi>, p. 816.</note> For everything new is apt to excite the awe
and dread of the savage. <q>It is a curious superstition,</q>
says a pioneer in Borneo, <q>this of the Dusuns, to attribute
anything&mdash;whether good or bad, lucky or unlucky&mdash;that
happens to them to something novel which has arrived in
their country. For instance, my living in Kindram has
caused the intensely hot weather we have experienced of
late.</q><note place='foot'>Frank Hatton, <hi rend='italic'>North Borneo</hi>
(1886), p. 233.</note> Some years ago a harmless naturalist was collecting
plants among the high forest-clad mountains on the borders
of China and Tibet. From the summit of a pass he gazed
with delight down a long valley which, stretching away as
far as eye could reach to the south, resembled a sea of
bloom, for everywhere the forest was ablaze with the
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
gorgeous hues of the rhododendron and azalea in flower.
In this earthly paradise the votary of science hastened to
install himself beside a lake. But hardly had he done so
when, alas! the weather changed. Though the season was
early June, the cold became intense, snow fell heavily, and
the bloom of the rhododendrons was cut off. The inhabitants
of a neighbouring village at once set down the unusual
severity of the weather to the presence of a stranger in the
forest; and a round-robin, signed by them unanimously,
was forwarded to the nearest mandarin, setting forth that
the snow which had blocked the road, and the hail which was
blasting their crops, were alike caused by the intruder, and
that all sorts of disturbances would follow if he were allowed
to remain. In these circumstances the naturalist, who had
intended to spend most of the summer among the mountains,
was forced to decamp. <q>Collecting in this country,</q> he
adds pathetically, <q>is not an easy matter.</q><note place='foot'>A. E. Pratt, <q>Two Journeys to
Ta-tsien-lu on the eastern Borders of
Tibet,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the R. Geographical
Society</hi>, xiii. (1891) p. 341.</note> The unusually
heavy rains which happened to follow the English survey
of the Nicobar Islands in the winter of 1886-1887 were
imputed by the alarmed natives to the wrath of the spirits
at the theodolites, dumpy-levellers, and other strange instruments
which had been set up in so many of their favourite
haunts; and some of them proposed to soothe the anger of
the spirits by sacrificing a pig.<note place='foot'>W. Svoboda, <q>Die Bewohner des
Nikobaren-Archipels,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Internationales
Archiv für Ethnographie</hi>, vi. (1893)
p. 13.</note> When the German Hans
Stade was a captive in a cannibal tribe of Brazilian Indians,
it happened that, shortly before a prisoner was to be eaten, a
great wind arose and blew away part of the roofs of the
huts. The savages were angry with Stade, and said he had
made the wind to come by looking into his thunder-skins, by
which they meant a book he had been reading, in order to
save the prisoner, who was a friend of his, from their
stomachs. So the pious German prayed to God, and God
mercifully heard his prayer; for next morning the weather
was beautifully fine, and his friend was butchered, carved,
and eaten in the most perfect comfort.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Captivity of Hans Stade of
Hesse, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1547-1555</hi>, translated
by A. Tootal (London, 1874), pp.
85 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> According to the
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
Orotchis of eastern Siberia, misfortunes have multiplied on
them with the coming of Europeans; <q>they even go so far
as to lay the appearance of <emph>new</emph> phenomena like thunder at
the door of the Russians.</q><note place='foot'>E. H. Fraser, <q>The Fish-skin
Tartars,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the China Branch
of the R. Asiatic Society for the Year
1891-92</hi>, N.S. xxvi. p. 15.</note> In the seventeenth century a
succession of bad seasons excited a revolt among the Esthonian
peasantry, who traced the origin of the evil to a water-mill,
which put a stream to some inconvenience by checking its
flow.<note place='foot'>Fr. Kreutzwald und H. Neus,
<hi rend='italic'>Mythische und magische Lieder der
Ehsten</hi> (St. Petersburg, 1854), p.
113.</note> The first introduction of iron ploughshares into
Poland having been followed by a succession of bad harvests,
the farmers attributed the badness of the crops to the iron
ploughshares, and discarded them for the old wooden ones.<note place='foot'>Alexand. Guagninus, <q>De ducatu
Samogitiae,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Respublica sive status
regni Poloniae, Lituaniae, Prussiae,
Livoniae</hi>, etc. (Elzevir, 1627) p. 276;
Johan. Lasicius, <q>De diis Samogitarum
caeterorumque Sarmatum,</q> in
<hi rend='italic'>Respublica</hi>, etc. (<hi rend='italic'>ut supra</hi>), p. 294
(p. 84, ed. W. Mannhardt, in <hi rend='italic'>Magazin
herausgegeben von der Lettisch&mdash;Literärischen
Gesellschaft</hi>, vol. xiv.).</note>
To this day the primitive Baduwis of Java, who live chiefly
by husbandry, will use no iron tools in tilling their fields.<note place='foot'>L. von Ende, <q>Die Baduwis
von Java,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen der anthropologischen
Gesellschaft in Wien</hi>, xix.
(1889) p. 10.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The dislike
of spirits to
iron allows
men to use
the metal
as a
weapon
against
them.
Iron used
as a charm
against
fairies in
the Highlands
of
Scotland. Iron used
as a
protective
charm by
Scotch
fishermen
and others. Iron used
as a
protective
charm
against
devils and
ghosts in
India, Annam. Africa, and Scotland.</note>
The general dislike of innovation, which always makes
itself strongly felt in the sphere of religion, is sufficient by
itself to account for the superstitious aversion to iron entertained
by kings and priests and attributed by them to the
gods; possibly this aversion may have been intensified in
places by some such accidental cause as the series of bad
seasons which cast discredit on iron ploughshares in Poland.
But the disfavour in which iron is held by the gods and
their ministers has another side. Their antipathy to the
metal furnishes men with a weapon which may be turned
against the spirits when occasion serves. As their dislike
of iron is supposed to be so great that they will not approach
persons and things protected by the obnoxious metal, iron
may obviously be employed as a charm for banning ghosts
and other dangerous spirits. And often it is so used. Thus
in the Highlands of Scotland the great safeguard against the
elfin race is iron, or, better yet, steel. The metal in any
form, whether as a sword, a knife, a gun-barrel, or what not,
is all-powerful for this purpose. Whenever you enter a fairy
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>
dwelling you should always remember to stick a piece of
steel, such as a knife, a needle, or a fish-hook, in the door;
for then the elves will not be able to shut the door till you
come out again. So too when you have shot a deer and
are bringing it home at night, be sure to thrust a knife into
the carcase, for that keeps the fairies from laying their weight
on it. A knife or a nail in your pocket is quite enough to
prevent the fairies from lifting you up at night. Nails in
the front of a bed ward off elves from women <q>in the straw</q>
and from their babes; but to make quite sure it is better to
put the smoothing-iron under the bed, and the reaping-hook
in the window. If a bull has fallen over a rock and been
killed, a nail stuck into it will preserve the flesh from the
fairies. Music discoursed on that melodious instrument, a
Jew's harp, keeps the elfin women away from the hunter,
because the tongue of the instrument is of steel.<note place='foot'>J. G. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Superstitions of
the Highlands and Islands of Scotland</hi>
(Glasgow, 1900), pp. 46 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Again,
when Scotch fishermen were at sea, and one of them
happened to take the name of God in vain, the first man
who heard him called out <q>Cauld airn,</q> at which every
man of the crew grasped the nearest bit of iron and held
it between his hands for a while.<note place='foot'>E. J. Guthrie, <hi rend='italic'>Old Scottish Customs</hi>,
p. 149; Ch. Rogers, <hi rend='italic'>Social Life in Scotland</hi>
(Edinburgh, 1884-1886), iii. 218.</note> So too when he hears
the unlucky word <q>pig</q> mentioned, a Scotch fisherman
will feel for the nails in his boots and mutter <q>Cauld
airn.</q><note place='foot'>J. Macdonald, <hi rend='italic'>Religion and Myth</hi>,
p. 91.</note> The same magic words are even whispered in
the churches of Scotch fishing-villages when the clergyman
reads the passage about the Gadarene swine.<note place='foot'>W. Gregor, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore of the North-East
of Scotland</hi> (London, 1881), p.
201. The fishermen think that if the
word <q>pig,</q> <q>sow,</q> or <q>swine</q> be
uttered while the lines are being baited,
the line will certainly be lost.</note> In
Morocco iron is considered a great protection against demons;
hence it is usual to place a knife or dagger under a sick
man's pillow.<note place='foot'>A. Leared, <hi rend='italic'>Morocco and the Moors</hi>
(London, 1876), p. 273.</note> The Singhalese believe that they are constantly
surrounded by evil spirits, who lie in wait to do them
harm. A peasant would not dare to carry good food, such
as cakes or roast meat, from one place to another without
putting an iron nail on it to prevent a demon from taking
possession of the viands and so making the eater ill. No
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
sick person, whether man or woman, would venture out of
the house without a bunch of keys or a knife in his hand,
for without such a talisman he would fear that some devil
might take advantage of his weak state to slip into his body.
And if a man has a large sore on his body he tries to keep
a morsel of iron on it as a protection against demons.<note place='foot'>Wickremasinghe, in <hi rend='italic'>Am Urquell</hi>,
v. (1894) p. 7.</note> The
inhabitants of Salsette, an island near Bombay, dread a spirit
called <foreign rend='italic'>gîrâ</foreign>, which plays many pranks with a solitary
traveller, leading him astray, lowering him into an empty
well, and so on. But a <foreign rend='italic'>gîrâ</foreign> dare not touch a person who
has on him anything made of iron or steel, particularly a
knife or a nail, of which the spirit stands in great fear. Nor
will he meddle with a woman, especially a married woman,
because he is afraid of her bangles.<note place='foot'>G. F. D'Penha, <q>Superstitions and
Customs in Salsette,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>,
xxviii. (1899) p. 114.</note> Among the Majhwâr,
an aboriginal tribe in the hill country of South Mirzapur, an
iron implement such as a sickle or a betel-cutter is constantly
kept near an infant's head during its first year for
the purpose of warding off the attacks of ghosts.<note place='foot'>W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes and Castes of
the North-Western Provinces and Oudh</hi>,
iii. 431.</note> Among
the Maravars, an aboriginal race of southern India, a knife
or other iron object lies beside a woman after childbirth to
keep off the devil.<note place='foot'>F. Jagor, <q>Bericht über verschiedene
Volksstämme in Vorderindien,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</hi>, xxvi. (1894)
p. 70.</note> When a Mala woman is in labour, a
sickle and some <foreign rend='italic'>nïm</foreign> leaves are always kept on the cot. In
Malabar people who have to pass by burning-grounds or
other haunted places commonly carry with them iron in some
form, such as a knife or an iron rod used as a walking-stick.
When pregnant women go on a journey, they carry
with them a few twigs or leaves of the <foreign rend='italic'>nïm</foreign> tree, or iron
in some shape, to scare evil spirits lurking in groves or
burial-grounds which they may pass.<note place='foot'>E. Thurston, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographic Notes
in Southern India</hi> (Madras, 1906),
p. 341.</note> In Bilaspore people
attribute cholera to a goddess who visits the afflicted family.
But they think that she may be kept off by iron; hence
during an epidemic of cholera people go about with axes
or sickles in their hands. <q>Their horses are not shod,
otherwise they might possibly nail horse-shoes to the door,
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
but their belief is more primitive; for with them iron does
not <emph>bring</emph> good luck, but it <emph>scares away</emph> the evil spirits, so
when a man has had an epileptic fit he will wear an iron
bracelet to keep away the evil spirit which was supposed
to have possessed him.</q><note place='foot'>E. M. Gordon, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Folk Tales</hi>
(London, 1908), p. 31.</note> The Annamites imagine that a
new-born child is exposed to the attacks of evil spirits.
To protect the infant from these malignant beings the
parents sometimes sell the child to the village smith, who
makes a small ring or circlet of iron and puts it on the
child's foot, commonly adding a little chain of iron. When
the infant has been sold to the smith and firmly
attached to him by the chain, the demons no longer have
any power over him. After the child has grown big and
the danger is over, the parents ask the smith to break
the iron ring and thank him for his services. No metal but
iron will serve the purpose.<note place='foot'>L. R. P. Cadière, <q>Coutumes
populaires de la vallée du Nguôn-So'n,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de l'École Française
d'Extrême-Orient</hi>, ii. (1902) pp.
354 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> On the Slave Coast of Africa
when a mother sees her child gradually wasting away, she concludes
that a demon has entered into the child and takes her
measures accordingly. To lure the demon out of the body
of her offspring, she offers a sacrifice of food; and while the
devil is bolting it, she attaches iron rings and small bells to
her child's ankles and hangs iron chains round his neck.
The jingling of the iron and the tinkling of the bells are
supposed to prevent the demon, when he has concluded his
repast, from entering again into the body of the little sufferer.
Hence many children may be seen in this part of Africa
weighed down with iron ornaments.<note place='foot'>Baudin, <q>Le Fétichisme,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Missions
Catholiques</hi>, xvi. (1884) p. 249; A. B.
Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>The Yoruba-speaking Peoples of
the Slave Coast</hi>, p. 113.</note> The use of iron as a
means to exorcise demons was forbidden by the Coptic
church.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Il Fetha Nagast o legislazione dei
re, codice ecclesiastico e civile di
Abissinia</hi>, tradotto e annotato da
Ignazio Guidi (Rome, 1899), p.
140.</note> In India <q>the mourner who performs the ceremony
of putting fire into the dead person's mouth carries with him
a piece of iron: it may be a key or a knife, or a simple piece
of iron, and during the whole time of his separation (for he
is unclean for a certain time, and no one will either touch
him or eat or drink with him, neither can he change his
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
clothes<note place='foot'>The reader may observe how closely
the taboos laid upon mourners resemble
those laid upon kings. From what has
gone before, the reason of the resemblance
is obvious.</note>) he carries the piece of iron about with him to keep
off the evil spirit. In Calcutta the Bengali clerks in the
Government Offices used to wear a small key on one of
their fingers when they had been chief mourners.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, iii.
p. 61, § 282.</note> When
a woman dies in childbed in the island of Salsette, they put
a nail or other piece of iron in the folds of her dress; this is
done especially if the child survives her. The intention
plainly is to prevent her spirit from coming back; for they
believe that a dead mother haunts the house and seeks to
carry away her child.<note place='foot'>G. F. D'Penha, <q>Superstitions
and Customs in Salsette,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Indian
Antiquary</hi>, xxviii. (1899) p. 115.</note> In the north-east of Scotland
immediately after a death had taken place, a piece of iron,
such as a nail or a knitting-wire, used to be stuck into all the
meal, butter, cheese, flesh, and whisky in the house, <q>to
prevent death from entering them.</q> The neglect of this
salutary precaution is said to have been closely followed by
the corruption of the food and drink; the whisky has been
known to become as white as milk.<note place='foot'>W. Gregor, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore of the North-East
of Scotland</hi>, p. 206.</note> When iron is used as
a protective charm after a death, as in these Hindoo and
Scotch customs, the spirit against which it is directed is the
ghost of the deceased.<note place='foot'>This is expressly said in <hi rend='italic'>Panjab
Notes and Queries</hi>, iii. p. 202, § 846.
On iron as a protective charm see also
F. Liebrecht, <hi rend='italic'>Gervasius von Tilbury</hi>,
pp. 99 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Zur Volkskunde</hi>, p.
311; L. Strackerjan, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglaube und
Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg</hi>,
i. pp. 354 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> § 233; A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der
deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> § 414 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
E. B. Tylor, <hi rend='italic'>Primitive Culture</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i.
140; W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p.
132 note. Many peoples, especially in
Africa, regard the smith's craft with
awe or fear as something uncanny and
savouring of magic. Hence smiths
are sometimes held in high honour,
sometimes looked down upon with
great contempt. These feelings probably
spring in large measure from the
superstitions which cluster round iron.
See R. Andree, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographische
Parallelen und Vergleiche</hi>, pp. 153-159;
G. McCall Theal, <hi rend='italic'>Records of
South-Eastern Africa</hi>, vii. 447; O.
Lenz, <hi rend='italic'>Skizzen aus West-Afrika</hi> (Berlin,
1878), p. 184; A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsche
Expedition an der Loango-Küste</hi>, ii.
217; M. Merkel, <hi rend='italic'>Die Masai</hi> (Berlin,
1904), pp. 110 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. C. Hollis, <hi rend='italic'>The
Masai</hi> (Oxford, 1905), pp. 330 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Nandi</hi> (Oxford, 1909), pp. 36
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. Spieth, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ewe-Stämme</hi>
(Berlin, 1906), p. 776; E. Doutté,
<hi rend='italic'>Magie et religion dans l'Afrique du
Nord</hi>, pp. 40 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Ph. Paulitschke,
<hi rend='italic'>Ethnographie Nordost-Afrikas, die
geistige Cultur der Danâkil, Galla
und Somâl</hi> (Berlin, 1896), p. 30; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Ethnographie Nordost-Afrikas, die
materielle Cultur der Danâkil, Galla
und Somâl</hi> (Berlin, 1893), p. 202; Th.
Levebvre, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage en Abyssinie</hi>, i. p.
lxi.; A. Cecchi, <hi rend='italic'>Da Zeila alle frontiere
del Caffa</hi>, i. (Rome, 1886) p. 45; M.
Parkyns, <hi rend='italic'>Life in Abyssinia</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (London,
1868), pp. 300 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. T. Bent, <hi rend='italic'>Sacred
City of the Ethiopians</hi> (London, 1893),
p. 212; G. Rohlf, <q>Reise durch
Nord-Afrika,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Petermann's Mittheilungen,
Ergänzungsheft</hi>, No. 25
(Gotha, 1868), pp. 30, 54; G.
Nachtigal, <q>Die Tibbu,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
für Erdkunde zu Berlin</hi>, v. (1870)
pp. 312 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Sahara und Sudan</hi>,
i. 443 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. 145, 178, 371, iii. 189,
234 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The Kayans of Borneo think
that a smith is inspired by a special
spirit, the smith's spirit, and that
without this inspiration he could do no
good work. See A. W. Nieuwenhuis,
<hi rend='italic'>Quer durch Borneo</hi>, ii. 198.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='3. Sharp Weapons tabooed.'/>
<head>§ 3. Sharp Weapons tabooed.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The use of
sharp-edged
weapons is
sometimes
forbidden
lest they
should
wound
spirits. Sharp-edged
weapons
removed
from
a room
where
there is
a lying-in
woman.</note>
There is a priestly king to the north of Zengwih in
Burma, revered by the Sotih as the highest spiritual and
temporal authority, into whose house no weapon or cutting
instrument may be brought.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen
Asien</hi>, i. (Leipsic, 1866) p. 136.</note> This rule may perhaps be
explained by a custom observed by various peoples after a
death; they refrain from the use of sharp instruments so
long as the ghost of the deceased is supposed to be near,
lest they should wound it. Thus among the Esquimaux of
Bering Strait <q>during the day on which a person dies in the
village no one is permitted to work, and the relatives must
perform no labour during the three following days. It is
especially forbidden during this period to cut with any
edged instrument, such as a knife or an axe; and the use of
pointed instruments, like needles or bodkins, is also forbidden.
This is said to be done to avoid cutting or injuring
the shade, which may be present at any time during this
period, and, if accidentally injured by any of these things, it
would become very angry and bring sickness or death to the
people. The relatives must also be very careful at this time
not to make any loud or harsh noises that may startle or
anger the shade.</q><note place='foot'>E. W. Nelson, <q>The Eskimo
about Bering Strait,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Eighteenth
Annual Report of the Bureau of
American Ethnology</hi>, part i. (Washington,
1899) p. 312. Compare <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>
pp. 315, 364; W. H. Dall, <hi rend='italic'>Alaska
and its Resources</hi>, p. 146; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, in
<hi rend='italic'>American Naturalist</hi>, xii. 7; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, in
<hi rend='italic'>The Yukon Territory</hi> (London, 1898),
p. 146.</note> We have seen that in like manner after
killing a white whale these Esquimaux abstain from the use
of cutting or pointed instruments for four days, lest they
should unwittingly cut or stab the whale's ghost.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>.</note> The
same taboo is sometimes observed by them when there is a
sick person in the village, probably from a fear of injuring
<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>
his shade which may be hovering outside of his body.<note place='foot'>A. Woldt, <hi rend='italic'>Captain Jacobsen's Reise
an der Nordwestküste Americas 1881-1883</hi>
(Leipsic, 1884), p. 243.</note>
After a death the Roumanians of Transylvania are careful
not to leave a knife lying with the sharp edge uppermost as
long as the corpse remains in the house, <q>or else the soul
will be forced to ride on the blade.</q><note place='foot'>W. Schmidt, <hi rend='italic'>Das Jahr und
seine Tage in Meinung und Brauch
der Romänen Siebenbürgens</hi> (Hermannstadt,
1866), p. 40; E. Gerard, <hi rend='italic'>The
Land beyond the Forest</hi>, i. 312.</note> For seven days after
a death, the corpse being still in the house, the Chinese abstain
from the use of knives and needles, and even of chopsticks,
eating their food with their fingers.<note place='foot'>J. H. Gray, <hi rend='italic'>China</hi> (London, 1878),
i. 288.</note> On the third, sixth,
ninth, and fortieth days after the funeral the old Prussians
and Lithuanians used to prepare a meal, to which, standing
at the door, they invited the soul of the deceased. At these
meals they sat silent round the table and used no knives,
and the women who served up the food were also without
knives. If any morsels fell from the table they were left
lying there for the lonely souls that had no living relations
or friends to feed them. When the meal was over the priest
took a broom and swept the souls out of the house, saying,
<q>Dear souls, ye have eaten and drunk. Go forth, go
forth.</q><note place='foot'>Jo. Meletius (Maeletius, Menecius),
<q>De religione et sacrificiis veterum
Borussorum,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>De Russorum Muscovitarum
et Tartarorum religione,
sacrificiis, nuptiarum, funerum ritu</hi>
(Spires, 1582), p. 263; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, reprinted
in <hi rend='italic'>Scriptores rerum Livonicarum</hi>,
vol. ii. (Riga and Leipsic, 1848) pp.
391 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, and in <hi rend='italic'>Mitteilungen der
Litterarischen Gesellschaft Masovia</hi>,
viii. (Lötzen, 1902) pp. 194 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
Compare Chr. Hartknoch, <hi rend='italic'>Alt und
neues Preussen</hi> (Frankfort and Leipsic,
1684), pp. 187 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In cutting the nails and combing the hair of a
dead prince in South Celebes only the back of the knife and
of the comb may be used.<note place='foot'>B. F. Matthes, <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot
de Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes</hi>, p.
136.</note> The Germans say that a knife
should not be left edge upwards, because God and the spirits
dwell there, or because it will cut the face of God and the
angels.<note place='foot'>Tettau und Temme, <hi rend='italic'>Die Volkssagen
Ostpreussens, Litthauens und Westpreussens</hi>,
p. 285; J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche
Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> iii. 454, compare pp.
441, 469; J. V. Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben
und Gebräuche aus Böhmen
und Mähren</hi>, p. 198, § 1387.</note> Among the Monumbos of New Guinea a pregnant
woman may not use sharp instruments; for example, she
may not sew. If she used such instruments, they think that
she would thereby stab the child in her womb.<note place='foot'>Franz Vormann, <q>Zur Psychologie,
Soziologie und Geschichte der
Monumbo-Papua, Deutsch-Neuginea,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Anthropos</hi>, v. (1910) p. 410.</note> Among
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
the Kayans of Borneo, when the birth-pangs begin, all
men leave the room, and all cutting weapons and iron
are also removed, <q>perhaps in order not to frighten the
child,</q> says the writer who reports the custom.<note place='foot'>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>In Centraal
Borneo</hi> (Leyden, 1900), i. 61; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Quer durch Borneo</hi>, i. 69.</note> The
reason may rather be a fear of injuring the flitting soul of
mother or babe. In Uganda, when the hour of a woman's
delivery is at hand, her husband carries all spears and
weapons out of the house,<note place='foot'>Fr. Stuhlmann, <hi rend='italic'>Mit Emin Pascha
ins Herz von Afrika</hi> (Berlin, 1894), p.
184.</note> doubtless in order that they
may not hurt the tender soul of the new-born child.
Early in the period of the Ming dynasty a professor of
geomancy made the alarming discovery that the spiritual
atmosphere of Kü-yung, a city near Nanking, was in a truly
deplorable condition through the intrusion of an evil spirit.
The Chinese emperor, with paternal solicitude, directed that
the north gate, by which the devil had effected his entrance,
should be built up solid, and that for the future the population
of the city should devote their energies to the pursuits
of hair-dressing, corn-cutting, and the shaving of bamboo-roots,
because, as he sagaciously perceived, all these professions
call for the use of sharp-edged instruments, which could not
fail to keep the demon at bay.<note place='foot'>J. J. M. de Groot, <hi rend='italic'>The Religious
System of China</hi>, iii. 1045 (Leyden,
1897).</note> We can now understand
why no cutting instrument may be taken into the house
of the Burmese pontiff. Like so many priestly kings, he is
probably regarded as divine, and it is therefore right that
his sacred spirit should not be exposed to the risk of being
cut or wounded whenever it quits his body to hover invisible
in the air or to fly on some distant mission.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='4. Blood tabooed.'/>
<head>§ 4. Blood tabooed.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Raw meat
tabooed
because the
life or
spirit is in
the blood.</note>
We have seen that the Flamen Dialis was forbidden to
touch or even name raw flesh.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Rom.</hi> 110; Aulus
Gellius, x. 15. 12. See above, p. 13.</note> At certain times a Brahman
teacher is enjoined not to look on raw flesh, blood, or persons
whose hands have been cut off.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Grihya-Sutras</hi>, translated by H.
Oldenberg, part i. pp. 81, 141 (<hi rend='italic'>Sacred
Books of the East</hi>, vol. xxix.).</note> In Uganda the father of
<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>
twins is in a state of taboo for some time after the birth;
among other rules he is forbidden to kill anything or to see
blood.<note place='foot'>J. Roscoe, <q>Further Notes on the
Manners and Customs of the Baganda,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxii. (1902) p. 53.</note> In the Pelew Islands when a raid has been made
on a village and a head carried off, the relations of the slain
man are tabooed and have to submit to certain observances
in order to escape the wrath of his ghost. They are shut
up in the house, touch no raw flesh, and chew betel over
which an incantation has been uttered by the exorcist.
After this the ghost of the slaughtered man goes away to
the enemy's country in pursuit of his murderer.<note place='foot'>J. Kubary, <hi rend='italic'>Die socialen Einrichtungen
der Pelauer</hi> (Berlin, 1885), pp.
126 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The taboo
is probably based on the common belief that the soul or
spirit of the animal is in the blood. As tabooed persons are
believed to be in a perilous state&mdash;for example, the relations
of the slain man are liable to the attacks of his indignant
ghost&mdash;it is especially necessary to isolate them from contact
with spirits; hence the prohibition to touch raw meat. But
as usual the taboo is only the special enforcement of a
general precept; in other words, its observance is particularly
enjoined in circumstances which seem urgently to call
for its application, but apart from such circumstances the
prohibition is also observed, though less strictly, as a common
rule of life. Thus some of the Esthonians will not taste
blood because they believe that it contains the animal's soul,
which would enter the body of the person who tasted the
blood.<note place='foot'>F. J. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Aus dem inneren
und äussern Leben der Ehsten</hi> (St.
Petersburg, 1876), pp. 448, 478.</note> Some Indian tribes of North America, <q>through a
strong principle of religion, abstain in the strictest manner
from eating the blood of any animal, as it contains the life
and spirit of the beast.</q> These Indians <q>commonly pull
their new-killed venison (before they dress it) several times
through the smoke and flame of the fire, both by the way of
a sacrifice and to consume the blood, life, or animal spirits
of the beast, which with them would be a most horrid
abomination to eat.</q><note place='foot'>James Adair, <hi rend='italic'>History of the American
Indians</hi> (London, 1775), pp. 134,
117. The Indians described by Adair
are the Creek, Cherokee, and other
tribes in the south-east of the United
States.</note> Among the western Dénés or
Tinneh Indians of British Columbia until lately no woman
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
would partake of blood, <q>and both men and women
abhorred the flesh of a beaver which had been caught and
died in a trap, and of a bear strangled to death in a snare,
because the blood remained in the carcase.</q><note place='foot'>A. G. Morice, <q>The Western
Dénés, their Manners and Customs,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the Canadian Institute</hi>,
Third Series, vii. (1888-89) p. 164.</note> Many of the
Slave, Hare, and Dogrib Indians scruple to taste the blood
of game; hunters of the former tribes collect the blood in
the animal's paunch and bury it in the snow.<note place='foot'>E. Petitot, <hi rend='italic'>Monographie des Dènè-Dindjié</hi>
(Paris, 1876), p. 76.</note> The Malepa,
a Bantu tribe in the north of the Transvaal, will taste no
blood. Hence they cut the throats of the cattle they
slaughter and let the blood drain out of the carcase before
they will eat it. And they do the same with game.<note place='foot'>Schlömann, <q>Die Malepa in
Transvaal,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen der Berliner
Gesellschaft für Anthropologie, Ethnologie
und Urgeschichte</hi>, 1894, p. (67).</note>
Jewish hunters poured out the blood of the game they had
killed and covered it up with dust. They would not taste
the blood, believing that the soul or life of the animal was
in the blood, or actually was the blood.<note place='foot'>Leviticus xvii. 10-14. The Hebrew
word (נפש) translated <q>life</q> in the
English version of verse 11 means also
<q>soul</q> (marginal note in the Revised
Version). Compare Deuteronomy xii.
23-25.</note> The same belief
was held by the Romans,<note place='foot'>Servius on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> v. 79;
compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> on <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> iii. 67.</note> and is shared by the Arabs,<note place='foot'>J. Wellhausen, <hi rend='italic'>Reste arabischen
Heidentumes</hi> (Berlin, 1887), p. 217.</note> by
Chinese medical writers,<note place='foot'>J. J. M. de Groot, <hi rend='italic'>Religious
System of China</hi>, iv. 80-82.</note> and by some of the Papuan tribes
of New Guinea.<note place='foot'>A. Goudswaard, <hi rend='italic'>De Papoewa's van
de Geelvinksbaai</hi> (Schiedam, 1863), p.
77.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Royal
blood may
not be spilt
on the
ground;
hence
kings and
princes are
put to
death by
methods
which do
not involve
bloodshed.</note>
It is a common rule that royal blood may not be shed
upon the ground. Hence when a king or one of his family
is to be put to death a mode of execution is devised by which
the royal blood shall not be spilt upon the earth. About the
year 1688 the generalissimo of the army rebelled against
the king of Siam and put him to death <q>after the manner
of royal criminals, or as princes of the blood are treated when
convicted of capital crimes, which is by putting them into a
large iron caldron, and pounding them to pieces with wooden
pestles, because none of their royal blood must be spilt on
the ground, it being, by their religion, thought great impiety
to contaminate the divine blood by mixing it with earth.</q><note place='foot'>Hamilton's <q>Account of the East
Indies,</q> in Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and
Travels</hi>, viii. 469. Compare W.
Robertson Smith, <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the
Semites</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. 369, note 1.</note>
<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>
Other Siamese modes of executing a royal person are
starvation, suffocation, stretching him on a scarlet cloth and
thrusting a billet of fragrant sandal-wood into his stomach,<note place='foot'>De la Loubere, <hi rend='italic'>Du royaume de
Siam</hi> (Amsterdam, 1691), i. 317.</note>
or lastly, sewing him up in a leather sack with a large stone
and throwing him into the river; sometimes the sufferer's
neck is broken with sandal-wood clubs before he is thrown
into the water.<note place='foot'>Pallegoix, <hi rend='italic'>Description du royaume
Thai ou Siam</hi>, i. 271, 365 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When Kublai Khan defeated and took his
uncle Nayan, who had rebelled against him, he caused Nayan
to be put to death by being wrapt in a carpet and tossed to
and fro till he died, <q>because he would not have the blood
of his Line Imperial spilt upon the ground or exposed in the
eye of Heaven and before the Sun.</q><note place='foot'>Marco Polo, translated by Col. H.
Yule (Second Edition, 1875), i. 335.</note> <q>Friar Ricold mentions
the Tartar maxim: <q>One Khan will put another to death to
get possession of the throne, but he takes great care that the
blood be not spilt. For they say that it is highly improper
that the blood of the Great Khan should be spilt upon the
ground; so they cause the victim to be smothered somehow
or other.</q> The like feeling prevails at the court of Burma,
where a peculiar mode of execution without bloodshed is
reserved for princes of the blood.</q><note place='foot'>Col. H. Yule on Marco Polo, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> Another writer on
Burma observes that <q>according to Mongolian tradition, it
is considered improper to spill the blood of any member of
the royal race. Princes of the Blood are executed by a
blow, or blows, of a bludgeon, inflicted on the back of the
neck. The corpse is placed in a red velvet sack, which is
fixed between two large perforated jars, and then sunk in
the river Irawadi. Princesses are executed in a similar
manner, with the exception that they are put to death by a
blow in front, instead of the back of the neck.</q><note place='foot'>A. Fytche, <hi rend='italic'>Burma, Past and
Present</hi> (London, 1878), i. 217 note.
Compare <hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>, xxix.
(1900) p. 199.</note> In 1878
the relations of Theebaw, king of Burma, were despatched
by being beaten across the throat with a bamboo.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>, xx. (1891)
p. 49.</note> In
Tonquin the ordinary mode of execution is beheading, but
persons of the blood royal are strangled.<note place='foot'>Baron's <q>Description of the Kingdom of Tonqueen,</q> in Pinkerton's
<hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, ix. 691.</note> In Ashantee the
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
blood of none of the royal family may be shed; if one of
them is guilty of a great crime he is drowned in the river
Dah.<note place='foot'>T. E. Bowdich, <hi rend='italic'>Mission from
Cape Coast Castle to Ashantee</hi> (London,
1873), p. 207.</note> As the blood royal of Dahomey may not be spilled,
offenders of the royal family are drowned or strangled.
Commonly they are bound hand and foot, carried out to sea
in a canoe, and thrown overboard.<note place='foot'>A. B. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>Ewe-speaking Peoples of
the Slave Coast</hi>, p. 224, compare p. 89.</note> When a king of Benin
came to the throne he used to put his brothers to death;
but as no one might lay hands on a prince of the blood, the
king commanded his brothers to hang themselves, after
which he buried their bodies with great pomp.<note place='foot'>O. Dapper, <hi rend='italic'>Description de l'Afrique</hi>
(Amsterdam, 1686), p. 313.</note> In Madagascar
the blood of nobles might not be shed; hence when
four Christians of that class were to be executed they were
burned alive.<note place='foot'>J. Sibree, <hi rend='italic'>Madagascar and its
People</hi>, p. 430.</note> In Uganda <q>no one may shed royal blood
on any account, not even when ordered by the king to slay
one of the royal house; royalty may only be starved or
burned to death.</q><note place='foot'>J. Roscoe, <q>Further Notes on the
Manners and Customs of the Baganda,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxii. (1902) p. 50.</note> Formerly when a young king of
Uganda came of age all his brothers were burnt except two
or three, who were preserved to keep up the succession.<note place='foot'>C. T. Wilson and R. W. Felkin,
<hi rend='italic'>Uganda and the Egyptian Soudan</hi>
(London, 1882), i. 200.</note>
Or a space of ground having been fenced in with a high
paling and a deep ditch, the doomed men were led into the
enclosure and left there till they died, while guards kept
watch outside to prevent their escape.<note place='foot'>J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 67. There
is an Arab legend of a king who was
slain by opening the veins of his arms
and letting the blood drain into a bowl;
not a drop might fall on the ground,
otherwise there would be blood revenge
for it. Robertson Smith conjectured
that the legend was based on an old
form of sacrifice regularly applied to
captive chiefs (<hi rend='italic'>Religion of the Semites</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
p. 369 note, compare p. 418 note).</note> Among the Bawenda
of southern Africa dangerous princes are strangled, for their
blood may not be shed.<note place='foot'>Rev. E. Gottschling, <q>The Bawenda,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxxv. (1905) p. 366.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Reluctance
to shed
any human
blood on
the ground. Reluctance
to allow
human
blood to
fall on the
ground.</note>
The reluctance to spill royal blood seems to be only a
particular case of a general unwillingness to shed blood or at
least to allow it to fall on the ground. Marco Polo tells us
that in his day persons caught in the streets of Cambaluc
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>
(Peking) at unseasonable hours were arrested, and if found
guilty of a misdemeanour were beaten with a stick. <q>Under
this punishment people sometimes die, but they adopt it in
order to eschew bloodshed, for their <foreign rend='italic'>Bacsis</foreign> say that it is an
evil thing to shed man's blood.</q><note place='foot'>Marco Polo, i. 399, Yule's translation,
Second Edition.</note> When Captain Christian
was shot by the Manx Government at the Restoration in 1660,
the spot on which he stood was covered with white blankets,
that his blood might not fall on the ground.<note place='foot'>Sir Walter Scott, note 2 to <hi rend='italic'>Peveril
of the Peak</hi>, ch. v.</note> In West
Sussex people believe that the ground on which human blood
has been shed is accursed and will remain barren for ever.<note place='foot'>Charlotte Latham, <q>Some West
Sussex Superstitions,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Record</hi>,
i. (1878) p. 17.</note>
Among some primitive peoples, when the blood of a tribesman
has to be spilt it is not suffered to fall upon the ground,
but is received upon the bodies of his fellow-tribesmen.
Thus in some Australian tribes boys who are being circumcised
are laid on a platform, formed by the living bodies of
the tribesmen;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South Australia</hi>,
p. 230; E. J. Eyre, <hi rend='italic'>Journals of Expeditions
of Discovery into Central
Australia</hi>, ii. 335; R. Brough Smyth,
<hi rend='italic'>Aborigines of Victoria</hi>, i. 75 note.</note> and when a boy's tooth is knocked out as
an initiatory ceremony, he is seated on the shoulders of a
man, on whose breast the blood flows and may not be wiped
away.<note place='foot'>D. Collins, <hi rend='italic'>Account of the English
Colony of New South Wales</hi> (London,
1798), p. 580.</note> When Australian blacks bleed each other as a cure
for headache and other ailments, they are very careful not to
spill any of the blood on the ground, but sprinkle it on each
other.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South Australia</hi>,
pp. 224 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; G. F. Angas, <hi rend='italic'>Savage Life
and Scenes in Australia and New
Zealand</hi> (London, 1847), i. 110 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> We have already seen that in the Australian
ceremony for making rain the blood which is supposed to
imitate the rain is received upon the bodies of the tribesmen.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, vol. i. p. 256.</note>
<q>Also the Gauls used to drink their enemies' blood
and paint themselves therewith. So also they write that the
old Irish were wont; and so have I seen some of the Irish
do, but not their enemies' but friends' blood, as, namely,
at the execution of a notable traitor at Limerick, called
Murrogh O'Brien, I saw an old woman, which was his foster-mother,
take up his head whilst he was quartered and suck
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
up all the blood that ran thereout, saying that the earth was
not worthy to drink it, and therewith also steeped her face
and breast and tore her hair, crying out and shrieking most
terribly.</q><note place='foot'>Edmund Spenser, <hi rend='italic'>View of the State
of Ireland</hi>, p. 101 (reprinted in H.
Morley's <hi rend='italic'>Ireland under Elizabeth and
James the First</hi>, London, 1890).</note> After a battle in Horne Island, South Pacific, it
was found that the brother of the vanquished king was
among the wounded. <q>It was sad to see his wife collect in
her hands the blood which had flowed from his wounds, and
throw it on to her head, while she uttered piercing cries.
All the relatives of the wounded collected in the same
manner the blood which had flowed from them, down even
to the last drop, and they even applied their lips to the
leaves of the shrubs and licked it all up to the last drop.</q><note place='foot'><q>Futuna, or Horne Island and its
People,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Polynesian
Society</hi>, vol. i. No. 1 (April 1892), p.
43.</note>
In the Marquesas Islands the persons who helped a woman
at childbirth received on their heads the blood which flowed
at the cutting of the navel-string; for the blood might not
touch anything but a sacred object, and in Polynesia the
head is sacred in a high degree.<note place='foot'>Max Radiguet, <hi rend='italic'>Les Derniers Sauvages</hi>
(Paris, 1882), p. 175.</note> In South Celebes at
childbirth a female slave stands under the house (the houses
being raised on posts above the ground) and receives in a
basin on her head the blood which trickles through the
bamboo floor.<note place='foot'>B. F. Matthes, <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de
Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes</hi>, p. 53.</note> Among the Latuka of central Africa the
earth on which a drop of blood has fallen at childbirth is
carefully scraped up with an iron shovel, put into a pot along
with the water used in washing the mother, and buried
tolerably deep outside the house on the left-hand side.<note place='foot'>Fr. Stuhlmann, <hi rend='italic'>Mit Emin Pascha
ins Herz von Afrika</hi>, p. 795.</note> In
West Africa, if a drop of your blood has fallen on the ground,
you must carefully cover it up, rub and stamp it into the
soil; if it has fallen on the side of a canoe or a tree, the
place is cut out and the chip destroyed.<note place='foot'>Miss Mary H. Kingsley, <hi rend='italic'>Travels
in West Africa</hi>, pp. 440, 447.</note> The Caffres, we
are told, have a great horror of blood, and must purify
themselves from the pollution if they have shed it and been
bespattered by it. Hence warriors on the return from
battle purge themselves with emetics, and that so violently
that some of them give up the ghost. A Caffre would
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
never allow even a drop of blood from his nose or a wound
to lie uncovered, but huddles it over with earth, that his
feet may not be defiled by it.<note place='foot'>A. Kropf, <q>Die religiösen Anschauungen
der Kaffern,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen
der Berliner Gesellschaft für
Anthropologie, Ethnologie und Urgeschichte</hi>,
1888, p. (46).</note> One motive of these African
customs may be a wish to prevent the blood from falling
into the hands of magicians, who might make an evil use
of it. That is admittedly the reason why people in West
Africa stamp out any blood of theirs which has fallen on
the ground or cut out any wood that has been soaked
with it.<note place='foot'>R. H. Nassau, <hi rend='italic'>Fetichism in West
Africa</hi> (London, 1904), p. 83.</note> From a like dread of sorcery natives of New
Guinea are careful to burn any sticks, leaves, or rags which
are stained with their blood; and if the blood has dripped
on the ground they turn up the soil and if possible light a
fire on the spot.<note place='foot'>Le R. P. Guis, <q>Les <hi rend='italic'>Nepu</hi> ou
Sorciers,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Missions Catholiques</hi>, xxxvi.
(1904) p. 370. See also <hi rend='italic'>The Magic
Art and the Evolution of Kings</hi>, vol.
i. p. 205.</note> The same fear explains the curious
duties discharged by a class of men called <foreign rend='italic'>ramanga</foreign> or
<q>blue blood</q> among the Betsileo of Madagascar. It is
their business to eat all the nail-parings and to lick up all
the spilt blood of the nobles. When the nobles pare their
nails, the parings are collected to the last scrap and
swallowed by these <foreign rend='italic'>ramanga</foreign>. If the parings are too large,
they are minced small and so gulped down. Again, should
a nobleman wound himself, say in cutting his nails or
treading on something, the <foreign rend='italic'>ramanga</foreign> lick it up as fast as
possible. Nobles of high rank hardly go anywhere without
these humble attendants; but if it should happen that
there are none of them present, the cut nails and the
spilt blood are carefully collected to be afterwards swallowed
by the <foreign rend='italic'>ramanga</foreign>. There is scarcely a nobleman of any
pretensions who does not strictly observe this custom,<note place='foot'>A. van Gennep, <hi rend='italic'>Tabou et
totémisme à Madagascar</hi>, p. 338,
quoting J. Sibree, <q>Remarkable Ceremonial
at the Decease and Burial of
a Betsileo Prince,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Antananarivo
Annual</hi>, No. xxii. (1898) pp. 195 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> the
intention of which probably is to prevent these parts of his
person from falling into the hands of sorcerers, who on
the principles of contagious magic could work him harm
thereby. The tribes of the White Nile are said never to
shed human blood in their villages because they think the
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
sight of it would render women barren or bring misfortune
on their children. Hence executions and murders commonly
take place on the roads or in the forest.<note place='foot'>Brun-Rollet, <hi rend='italic'>Le Nil Blanc et le
Soudan</hi> (Paris, 1855), pp. 239 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Unwillingness
to
shed the
blood of
animals.</note>
The unwillingness to shed blood is extended by some
peoples to the blood of animals. Thus, when the Caffres
offer an ox to the spirits, the blood of the beast must be
carefully caught in a calabash, and none of it may fall on
the ground.<note place='foot'>Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>The Essential Kafir</hi>,
p. 169.</note> When the Wanika in eastern Africa kill their
cattle for food, <q>they either stone or beat the animal to
death, so as not to shed the blood.</q><note place='foot'>Lieut. Emery, in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the R.
Geographical Society</hi>, iii. 282.</note> Amongst the Damaras
cattle killed for food are suffocated, but when sacrificed they
are speared to death.<note place='foot'>Ch. Andersson, <hi rend='italic'>Lake Ngami</hi>
(London, 1856), p. 224.</note> But like most pastoral tribes in
Africa, both the Wanika and Damaras very seldom kill
their cattle, which are indeed commonly invested with a
kind of sanctity.<note place='foot'>Ch. New, <hi rend='italic'>Life, Wanderings, and
Labours in Eastern Africa</hi>, p. 124;
Francis Galton, <q>Domestication of
Animals,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the Ethnological
Society of London</hi>, N.S., iii. (1865)
p. 135. On the original sanctity of
domestic animals see, above all, W.
Robertson Smith, <hi rend='italic'>The Religion of
the Semites</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp. 280 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 295 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Some of the Ewe-speaking negroes of
Togoland, in West Africa, celebrate a festival in honour of
the Earth at which it is unlawful to shed blood on the
ground. Hence the fowls which are sacrificed on these
occasions have their necks wrung, not their throats cut.<note place='foot'>J. Spieth, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ewe-Stämme</hi>, p.
796.</note>
In killing an animal for food the Easter Islanders do not
shed its blood, but stun it or suffocate it in smoke.<note place='foot'>L. Linton Palmer, <q>A Visit to
Easter Island,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the R.
Geographical Society</hi>, xl. (1870) p.
171.</note> When
the natives of San Cristoval, one of the Solomon Islands,
sacrifice a pig to a ghost in a sacred place, they take great
care that the blood shall not fall on the ground; so they
place the animal in a large bowl and cut it up there.<note place='foot'>R. H. Codrington, <hi rend='italic'>The Melanesians</hi>,
p. 129.</note> It is
said that in ancient India the sacrificial victims were not
slaughtered but strangled.<note place='foot'>Strabo, xv. 1. 54, p. 710.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Anything
on which
a Maori
chief's
blood falls
becomes
sacred to
him.</note>
The general explanation of the reluctance to shed blood
on the ground is probably to be found in the belief that the
soul is in the blood, and that therefore any ground on which it
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>
may fall necessarily becomes taboo or sacred. In New Zealand
anything upon which even a drop of a high chief's blood
chances to fall becomes taboo or sacred to him. For
instance, a party of natives having come to visit a chief in a
fine new canoe, the chief got into it, but in doing so a splinter
entered his foot, and the blood trickled on the canoe, which
at once became sacred to him. The owner jumped out,
dragged the canoe ashore opposite the chief's house, and left
it there. Again, a chief in entering a missionary's house
knocked his head against a beam, and the blood flowed.
The natives said that in former times the house would have
belonged to the chief.<note place='foot'>R. Taylor, <hi rend='italic'>Te Ika a Maui, or
New Zealand and its Inhabitants</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp.
194 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> As usually happens with taboos of
universal application, the prohibition to spill the blood of a
tribesman on the ground applies with peculiar stringency to
chiefs and kings, and is observed in their case long after it
has ceased to be observed in the case of others.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The prohibition
to
pass under
a trellised
vine is
probably
based on
the idea
that the
juice of the
grape is the
blood or
spirit of the
vine. This
notion is
confirmed
by the intoxicating
or inspiring
effect of
wine.</note>
We have seen that the Flamen Dialis was not allowed to
walk under a trellised vine.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Rom.</hi> 112;
Aulus Gellius, x. 15. 13. See above,
p. 14.</note> The reason for this prohibition
was perhaps as follows. It has been shewn that plants are
considered as animate beings which bleed when cut, the red
juice which exudes from some of them being regarded as the
blood of the plant.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, vol. ii. pp. 18, 20.</note> The juice of the grape is therefore
naturally conceived as the blood of the vine.<note place='foot'>Compare W. Robertson Smith,
<hi rend='italic'>Religion of the Semites</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p. 230.</note> And since,
as we have just seen, the soul is often believed to be in the
blood, the juice of the grape is regarded as the soul, or as
containing the soul, of the vine. This belief is strengthened
by the intoxicating effects of wine. For, according to
primitive notions, all abnormal mental states, such as intoxication
or madness, are caused by the entrance of a spirit into
the person; such mental states, in other words, are accounted
forms of possession or inspiration. Wine, therefore, is considered
on two distinct grounds as a spirit, or containing a
spirit; first because, as a red juice, it is identified with the
blood of the plant, and second because it intoxicates or
inspires. Therefore if the Flamen Dialis had walked under
a trellised vine, the spirit of the vine, embodied in the
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
clusters of grapes, would have been immediately over his
head and might have touched it, which for a person like him
in a state of permanent taboo<note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dialis cotidie feriatus est</foreign>,</q> Aulus
Gellius, x. 15. 16.</note> would have been highly
dangerous. This interpretation of the prohibition will be
made probable if we can shew, first, that wine has been
actually viewed by some peoples as blood, and intoxication
as inspiration produced by drinking the blood; and, second,
that it is often considered dangerous, especially for tabooed
persons, to have either blood or a living person over their
heads.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Wine
treated as
blood, and
intoxication
as
inspiration.</note>
With regard to the first point, we are informed by
Plutarch that of old the Egyptian kings neither drank wine
nor offered it in libations to the gods, because they held it
to be the blood of beings who had once fought against the
gods, the vine having sprung from their rotting bodies;
and the frenzy of intoxication was explained by the supposition
that the drunken man was filled with the blood of
the enemies of the gods.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 6. A
myth apparently akin to this has been
preserved in some native Egyptian
writings. See Ad. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Ägypten
und ägyptisches Leben im Altertum</hi>, p.
364. Wine might not be taken into
the temple at Heliopolis (Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 6). It was apparently
forbidden to enter the temple at Delos
after drinking wine (Dittenberger,
<hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No.
564). When wine was offered to the
Good Goddess at Rome it was not
called wine but milk (Macrobius,
<hi rend='italic'>Saturn</hi>, i. 12. 5; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest.
Rom.</hi> 20). It was a rule of Roman
religion that wine might not be poured
out in libations to the gods which had
been made either from grapes trodden
with bleeding feet or from the clusters
of a vine beside which a human body
had hung in a noose (Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi>
xiv. 119). This rule shews that wine
was supposed to be defiled by blood
or death.</note> The Aztecs regarded <foreign rend='italic'>pulque</foreign> or
the wine of the country as bad, on account of the wild deeds
which men did under its influence. But these wild deeds
were believed to be the acts, not of the drunken man, but of
the wine-god by whom he was possessed and inspired; and
so seriously was this theory of inspiration held that if any
one spoke ill of or insulted a tipsy man, he was liable to be
punished for disrespect to the wine-god incarnate in his
votary. Hence, says Sahagun, it was believed, not without
ground, that the Indians intoxicated themselves on purpose
to commit with impunity crimes for which they would
certainly have been punished if they had committed them
<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>
sober.<note place='foot'>Bernardino de Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire
générale des choses de la Nouvelle-Espagne</hi>,
traduite par Jourdanet et
Siméon (Paris, 1880), pp. 46 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The
native Mexican wine (<foreign rend='italic'>pulque</foreign>) is made
from the sap of the great American
aloe. See the note of the French
translators of Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
858 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; E. J. Payne, <hi rend='italic'>History of the
New World called America</hi>, i. 374 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
The Chiquites Indians of Paraguay
believed that the spirit of <foreign rend='italic'>chica</foreign>, or
beer made from maize, could punish
with sickness the person who was so
irreverent or careless as to upset a
vessel of the liquor. See Charlevoix,
<hi rend='italic'>Histoire du Paraguay</hi> (Paris, 1756),
ii. 234.</note> Thus it appears that on the primitive view intoxication
or the inspiration produced by wine is exactly parallel
to the inspiration produced by drinking the blood of animals.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, vol. i. pp. 381 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
The soul or life is in the blood, and wine is the blood of the
vine. Hence whoever drinks the blood of an animal is
inspired with the soul of the animal or of the god, who, as
we have seen,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Op. cit.</hi> vol. i. pp. 384 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> is often supposed to enter into the animal
before it is slain; and whoever drinks wine drinks the blood,
and so receives into himself the soul or spirit, of the god of
the vine.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Fear of
passing
under
women's
blood.</note>
With regard to the second point, the fear of passing
under blood or under a living person, we are told that some
of the Australian blacks have a dread of passing under a
leaning tree or even under the rails of a fence. The reason
they give is that a woman may have been upon the tree or
fence, and some blood from her may have fallen on it and
might fall from it on them.<note place='foot'>E. M. Curr, <hi rend='italic'>The Australian Race</hi>
(Melbourne and London, 1887), iii.
179.</note> In Ugi, one of the Solomon
Islands, a man will never, if he can help it, pass under a tree
which has fallen across the path, for the reason that a woman
may have stepped over it before him.<note place='foot'>H. B. Guppy, <hi rend='italic'>The Solomon
Islands and their Natives</hi> (London,
1887), p. 41.</note> Amongst the Karens
of Burma <q>going under a house, especially if there are
females within, is avoided; as is also the passing under
trees of which the branches extend downwards in a particular
direction, and the butt-end of fallen trees, etc.</q><note place='foot'>E. B. Cross, <q>On the Karens,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the American Oriental
Society</hi>, iv. (1854) p. 312.</note> The
Siamese think it unlucky to pass under a rope on which
women's clothes are hung, and to avert evil consequences
the person who has done so must build a chapel to the
earth-spirit.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen
Asien</hi>, iii. 230.</note>
</p>

<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Disastrous
effect of
women's
blood on
men.</note>
Probably in all such cases the rule is based on a fear of
being brought into contact with blood, especially the blood
of women. From a like fear a Maori will never lean his
back against the wall of a native house.<note place='foot'>For the reason, see E. Shortland,
<hi rend='italic'>Traditions and Superstitions of the
New Zealanders</hi>, pp. 112 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 292;
E. Tregear, <q>The Maoris of New
Zealand,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xix. (1890) p. 118.</note> For the blood of
women is supposed to have disastrous effects upon males.
The Arunta of central Australia believe that a draught of
woman's blood would kill the strongest man.<note place='foot'>F. J. Gillen, in <hi rend='italic'>Report of the Horn
Scientific Expedition to Central Australia</hi>,
pt. iv. p. 182.</note> In the
Encounter Bay tribe of South Australia boys are warned
that if they see the blood of women they will early become
grey-headed and their strength will fail prematurely.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South Australia</hi>,
p. 186.</note> Men of
the Booandik tribe in South Australia think that if they see the
blood of their women they will not be able to fight against
their enemies and will be killed; if the sun dazzles their eyes
at a fight, the first woman they afterwards meet is sure to
get a blow from their club.<note place='foot'>Mrs. James Smith, <hi rend='italic'>The Booandik
Tribe</hi>, p. 5.</note> In the island of Wetar it is
thought that if a man or a lad comes upon a woman's blood
he will be unfortunate in war and other undertakings, and
that any precautions he may take to avoid the misfortune
will be vain.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik- en
kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en
Papua</hi>, p. 450.</note> The people of Ceram also believe that
men who see women's blood will be wounded in battle.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 139,
compare p. 209.</note>
It is an Esthonian belief that men who see women's blood
will suffer from an eruption on the skin.<note place='foot'>F. J. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Aus dem innern
und äussern Leben der Ehsten</hi>, p. 475.</note> A Fan negro
told Miss Kingsley that a young man in his village, who
was so weak that he could hardly crawl about, had fallen
into this state through seeing the blood of a woman who
had been killed by a falling tree. <q>The underlying idea
regarding blood is of course the old one that the blood is
the life. The life in Africa means a spirit, hence the
liberated blood is the liberated spirit, and liberated spirits
are always whipping into people who do not want them. In
the case of the young Fan, the opinion held was that the
weak spirit of the woman had got into him.</q><note place='foot'>Miss Mary H. Kingsley, <hi rend='italic'>Travels
in West Africa</hi>, p. 447. Conversely
among the central Australian tribes
women are never allowed to witness
the drawing of blood from men, which
is often done for purposes of decoration;
and when a quarrel has taken place and
men's blood has been spilt in the presence
of women, it is usual for the man
whose blood has been shed to perform a
ceremony connected with his own or his
father or mother's totem. See Spencer
and Gillen, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of Central
Australia</hi>, p. 463.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='5. The Head tabooed.'/>
<head>§ 5. The Head tabooed.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The head
sacred
because a
spirit
resides
in it.</note>
Again, the reason for not passing under dangerous
objects, like a vine or women's blood, is a fear that they
may come in contact with the head; for among many
peoples the head is peculiarly sacred. The special sanctity
attributed to it is sometimes explained by a belief that it is
the seat of a spirit which is very sensitive to injury or
disrespect. Thus the Yorubas of the Slave Coast hold that
every man has three spiritual inmates, of whom the first,
called Olori, dwells in the head and is the man's protector,
guardian, and guide. Offerings are made to this spirit, chiefly
of fowls, and some of the blood mixed with palm-oil is rubbed
on the forehead.<note place='foot'>A. B. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>The Yoruba-speaking
Peoples of the Slave Coast</hi>, pp. 125
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Karens of Burma suppose that a
being called the <foreign rend='italic'>tso</foreign> resides in the upper part of the head,
and while it retains its seat no harm can befall the person
from the efforts of the seven <foreign rend='italic'>Kelahs</foreign>, or personified passions.
<q>But if the <foreign rend='italic'>tso</foreign> becomes heedless or weak certain evil to the
person is the result. Hence the head is carefully attended
to, and all possible pains are taken to provide such dress
and attire as will be pleasing to the <foreign rend='italic'>tso</foreign>.</q><note place='foot'>E. B. Cross, <q>On the Karens,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the American Oriental
Society</hi>, iv. (1854) pp. 311 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Siamese
think that a spirit called <foreign rend='italic'>khuan</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>kwun</foreign> dwells in the human
head, of which it is the guardian spirit. The spirit must be
carefully protected from injury of every kind; hence the act
of shaving or cutting the hair is accompanied with many
ceremonies. The <foreign rend='italic'>kwun</foreign> is very sensitive on points of honour,
and would feel mortally insulted if the head in which he
resides were touched by the hand of a stranger. When Dr.
Bastian, in conversation with a brother of the king of Siam,
raised his hand to touch the prince's skull in order to illustrate
some medical remarks he was making, a sullen and
threatening murmur bursting from the lips of the crouching
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
courtiers warned him of the breach of etiquette he had committed,
for in Siam there is no greater insult to a man of rank
than to touch his head. If a Siamese touch the head of
another with his foot, both of them must build chapels to the
earth-spirit to avert the omen. Nor does the guardian spirit
of the head like to have the hair washed too often; it might
injure or incommode him. It was a grand solemnity when
the king of Burma's head was washed with water drawn
from the middle of the river. Whenever the native professor,
from whom Dr. Bastian took lessons in Burmese at Mandalay,
had his head washed, which took place as a rule once a
month, he was generally absent for three days together, that
time being consumed in preparing for, and recovering from,
the operation of head-washing. Dr. Bastian's custom of
washing his head daily gave rise to much remark.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen
Asien</hi>, ii. 256, iii. 71, 230, 235 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
The spirit is called <foreign rend='italic'>kwun</foreign> by E. Young
(<hi rend='italic'>The Kingdom of the Yellow Robe</hi>, pp.
75 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>). See below, pp. <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The
head of the king of Persia was cleaned only once a year, on
his birthday.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ix. 110. This passage
was pointed out to me by the late
Mr. E. S. Shuckburgh of Emmanuel
College, Cambridge.</note> Roman women washed their heads annually
on the thirteenth of August, Diana's day.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaestiones Romanae</hi>,
100. Plutarch's words (μάλιστα ῥύπτεσθαι
τὰς κεφαλὰς καὶ καθαίρειν ἐπιτηδεύουσι)
leave room to hope that the
ladies did not strictly confine their
ablutions to one day in the year.</note> The Indians of
Peru fancied they could rid themselves of their sins by
scrubbing their heads with a small stone and then washing
them in a stream.<note place='foot'>P. J. de Arriaga, <hi rend='italic'>Extirpación de
la Idolatria del Piru</hi> (Lima, 1621),
pp. 28, 29.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Objection
to have any
one overhead.</note>
Again, the Burmese think it an indignity to have any
one, especially a woman, over their heads, and for this
reason Burmese houses have never more than one story.
The houses are raised on posts above the ground, and
whenever anything fell through the floor Dr. Bastian had
always difficulty in persuading a servant to fetch it from
under the house. In Rangoon a priest, summoned to the
bedside of a sick man, climbed up a ladder and got in at
the window rather than ascend the staircase, to reach which
he must have passed under a gallery. A pious Burman of
Rangoon, finding some images of Buddha in a ship's cabin,
offered a high price for them, that they might not be degraded
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
by sailors walking over them on the deck.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 150; Sangermano,
<hi rend='italic'>Description of the Burmese Empire</hi>
(Rangoon, 1885), p. 131; C. F. S.
Forbes, <hi rend='italic'>British Burma</hi>, p. 334; Shway
Yoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Burman</hi> (London, 1882),
i. 91.</note> Formerly in
Siam no person might cross a bridge while his superior in
rank was passing underneath, nor might he walk in a room
above one in which his superior was sitting or lying.<note place='foot'>E. Young, <hi rend='italic'>The Kingdom of the
Yellow Robe</hi> (Westminster, 1898), p.
131.</note> The
Cambodians esteem it a grave offence to touch a man's
head; some of them will not enter a place where anything
whatever is suspended over their heads; and the meanest
Cambodian would never consent to live under an inhabited
room. Hence the houses are built of one story only; and
even the Government respects the prejudice by never placing
a prisoner in the stocks under the floor of a house, though
the houses are raised high above the ground.<note place='foot'>J. Moura, <hi rend='italic'>Le Royaume du Cambodge</hi>,
i. 178, 388.</note> The same
superstition exists amongst the Malays; for an early
traveller reports that in Java people <q>wear nothing on their
heads, and say that nothing must be on their heads ...
and if any person were to put his hand upon their head they
would kill him; and they do not build houses with storeys,
in order that they may not walk over each other's heads.</q><note place='foot'>Duarte Barbosa, <hi rend='italic'>Description of the
Coasts of East Africa and Malabar in
the beginning of the Sixteenth Century</hi>
(Hakluyt Society, 1866), p. 197.</note>
In Uganda no person belonging to the king's totem clan
was allowed to get on the top of the palace to roof it, for
that would have been regarded as equivalent to getting on
the top of the king. Hence the palace had to be roofed by
men of a different clan from the king.<note place='foot'>This I learned in conversation
with Messrs. Roscoe and Miller, missionaries
to Uganda. The system of
totemism exists in full force in Uganda.
No man will eat his totem animal
or marry a woman of his own totem
clan. Among the totems of the clans
are the lion, leopard, elephant, antelope,
mushroom, buffalo, sheep, grasshopper,
crocodile, otter, beaver, and lizard. See
<hi rend='italic'>Totemism and Exogamy</hi>, ii. 472 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sanctity of
the head,
especially
of a chief's
head, in
Polynesia and elsewhere.</note>
The same superstition as to the head is found in full
force throughout Polynesia. Thus of Gattanewa, a Marquesan
chief, it is said that <q>to touch the top of his head, or anything
which had been on his head, was sacrilege. To pass
over his head was an indignity never to be forgotten.
Gattanewa, nay, all his family, scorned to pass a gateway
which is ever closed, or a house with a door; all must be
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
as open and free as their unrestrained manners. He would
pass under nothing that had been raised by the hand of
man, if there was a possibility of getting round or over it.
Often have I seen him walk the whole length of our barrier,
in preference to passing between our water-casks; and at
the risk of his life scramble over the loose stones of a wall,
rather than go through the gateway.</q><note place='foot'>David Porter, <hi rend='italic'>Journal of a Cruise
made to the Pacific Ocean in the U.S.
Frigate <q>Essex</q></hi> (New York, 1822),
ii. 65.</note> Marquesan women
have been known to refuse to go on the decks of ships for
fear of passing over the heads of chiefs who might be below.<note place='foot'>Vincendon-Dumoulin et C. Desgraz
<hi rend='italic'>Îles Marquises</hi> (Paris, 1843), p. 262.</note>
The son of a Marquesan high priest has been seen to roll
on the ground in an agony of rage and despair, begging for
death, because some one had desecrated his head and
deprived him of his divinity by sprinkling a few drops of
water on his hair.<note place='foot'>Le P. Matthias G&mdash;&mdash;, <hi rend='italic'>Lettres sur
les Îles Marquises</hi> (Paris, 1843), p. 50.</note> But it was not the Marquesan chiefs
only whose heads were sacred. The head of every Marquesan
was taboo, and might neither be touched nor stepped
over by another; even a father might not step over the
head of his sleeping child;<note place='foot'>G. H. von Langsdorff, <hi rend='italic'>Reise um
die Welt</hi> (London, 1812), i. 115 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> women were forbidden to carry
or touch anything that had been in contact with, or had
merely hung over, the head of their husband or father.<note place='foot'>Max Radiguet, <hi rend='italic'>Les Derniers Sauvages</hi>
(Paris, 1882), p. 156.</note> No
one was allowed to be over the head of the king of Tonga.<note place='foot'>Capt. James Cook, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages</hi>, v. 427
(London, 1809).</note>
In Hawaii (the Sandwich Islands) if a man climbed upon a
chiefs house or upon the wall of his yard, he was put to
death; if his shadow fell on a chief, he was put to death;
if he walked in the shadow of a chiefs house with his head
painted white or decked with a garland or wetted with
water, he was put to death.<note place='foot'>Jules Remy, <hi rend='italic'>Ka Mooolelo Hawaii,
Histoire de l'Archipel Havaiien</hi> (Paris
and Leipsic, 1862), p. 159.</note> In Tahiti any one who
stood over the king or queen, or passed his hand over
their heads, might be put to death.<note place='foot'>W. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>Polynesian Researches</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(London, 1832-36), iii. 102.</note> Until certain rites
were performed over it, a Tahitian infant was especially
taboo; whatever touched the child's head, while it was
in this state, became sacred and was deposited in a consecrated
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
place railed in for the purpose at the child's house.
If a branch of a tree touched the child's head, the tree
was cut down; and if in its fall it injured another tree
so as to penetrate the bark, that tree also was cut down as
unclean and unfit for use. After the rites were performed
these special taboos ceased; but the head of a Tahitian was
always sacred, he never carried anything on it, and to touch
it was an offence.<note place='foot'>James Wilson, <hi rend='italic'>A Missionary
Voyage to the Southern Pacific Ocean</hi>
(London, 1799), pp. 354 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In New Zealand <q>the heads of the
chiefs were always tabooed (<foreign rend='italic'>tapu</foreign>), hence they could not
pass, or sit, under food hung up; or carry food, as others,
on their backs; neither would they eat a meal in a house,
nor touch a calabash of water in drinking. No one could
touch their head, nor, indeed, commonly speak of it, or
allude to it; to do so offensively was one of their heaviest
curses, and grossest insults, only to be wiped out with
blood.</q><note place='foot'>W. Colenso, <q>The Maori Races
of New Zealand,</q> p. 43, in <hi rend='italic'>Transactions
and Proceedings of the New
Zealand Institute</hi>, 1868, vol. i. (separately
paged).</note> So sacred was the head of a Maori chief that
<q>if he only touched it with his fingers, he was obliged
immediately to apply them to his nose, and snuff up the
sanctity which they had acquired by the touch, and thus
restore it to the part from whence it was taken.</q><note place='foot'>R. Taylor, <hi rend='italic'>To Ika a Maui, or
New Zealand and its Inhabitants</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p.
165. We have seen that under certain
special circumstances common persons
also are temporarily forbidden to touch
their heads with their hands. See above,
pp. <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>.</note> On account
of the sacredness of his head a Maori chief <q>could not blow
the fire with his mouth, for the breath being sacred, communicated
his sanctity to it, and a brand might be taken by
a slave, or a man of another tribe, or the fire might be used
for other purposes, such as cooking, and so cause his death.</q><note place='foot'>R. Taylor, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note>
It is a crime for a sacred person in New Zealand to leave
his comb, or anything else which has touched his head, in
a place where food has been cooked, or to suffer another
person to drink out of any vessel which has touched his
lips. Hence when a chief wishes to drink he never puts his
lips to the vessel, but holds his hands close to his mouth so
as to form a hollow, into which water is poured by another
person, and thence is allowed to flow into his mouth. If a
light is needed for his pipe, the burning ember taken from
<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>
the fire must be thrown away as soon as it is used; for the
pipe becomes sacred because it has touched his mouth; the
coal becomes sacred because it has touched the pipe; and
if a particle of the sacred cinder were replaced on the
common fire, the fire would also become sacred and could
no longer be used for cooking.<note place='foot'>E. Shortland, <hi rend='italic'>The Southern Districts
of New Zealand</hi> (London, 1851),
p. 293; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions and Superstitions
of the New Zealanders</hi>, pp.
107 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Some Maori chiefs, like
other Polynesians, object to go down into a ship's cabin
from fear of people passing over their heads.<note place='foot'>J. Dumont D'Urville, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage autour
du monde et à la recherche de La Pérouse,
exécuté sous son commandement sur la
corvette <q>Austrolabe</q>: histoire du
voyage</hi>, ii. 534.</note> Dire misfortune
was thought by the Maoris to await those who
entered a house where any article of animal food was
suspended over their heads. <q>A dead pigeon, or a piece
of pork hung from the roof, was a better protection from
molestation than a sentinel.</q><note place='foot'>R. A. Cruise, <hi rend='italic'>Journal of a Ten
Months' Residence in New Zealand</hi>
(London, 1823), p. 187; J. Dumont
D'Urville, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 533; E. Shortland,
<hi rend='italic'>The Southern Districts of New
Zealand</hi>, p. 30.</note> If I am right, the reason for
the special objection to having animal food over the head
is the fear of bringing the sacred head into contact with the
spirit of the animal; just as the reason why the Flamen
Dialis might not walk under a vine was the fear of bringing
his sacred head into contact with the spirit of the vine.
Similarly King Darius would not pass through a gate over
which there was a tomb, because in doing so he would have
had a corpse above his head.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, i. 187.</note> Among the Awuna tribes of
the Gold Coast, West Africa, the worshippers of Hebesio,
the god of thunder, believe that their heads are sacred, being
associated in some mysterious way with the presence of the
protective spirit of their god, which has passed into them
through this channel at baptism. Hence they carefully
guard their heads against injury, especially against any
wound that might draw blood, for they think that such a
wound would entail the loss of reason on the sufferer, and
that it would bring down the wrath of the thundering god
and of his mouth-piece the fetish priest on the impious
smiter.<note place='foot'>H. France, <q>Customs of the
Awuna Tribes,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the African
Society</hi>, No. 17 (October, 1905), p.
39.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='6. Hair tabooed.'/>
<head>§ 6. Hair tabooed.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>When the
head is
sacred, the
cutting of
the hair
becomes a
difficult
and
dangerous
operation.
The hair of
kings,
priests,
chiefs, sorcerers,
and other
tabooed
persons is
sometimes
kept
unshorn. Hair kept
unshorn
on various
occasions,
such as
a wife's
pregnancy,
a journey,
and war.</note>
When the head was considered so sacred that it might not
even be touched without grave offence, it is obvious that the
cutting of the hair must have been a delicate and difficult
operation. The difficulties and dangers which, on the
primitive view, beset the operation are of two kinds. There
is first the danger of disturbing the spirit of the head, which
may be injured in the process and may revenge itself upon
the person who molests him. Secondly, there is the difficulty
of disposing of the shorn locks. For the savage believes
that the sympathetic connexion which exists between himself
and every part of his body continues to exist even after
the physical connexion has been broken, and that therefore
he will suffer from any harm that may befall the severed
parts of his body, such as the clippings of his hair or the
parings of his nails. Accordingly he takes care that these
severed portions of himself shall not be left in places where
they might either be exposed to accidental injury or fall
into the hands of malicious persons who might work magic
on them to his detriment or death. Such dangers are
common to all, but sacred persons have more to fear from
them than ordinary people, so the precautions taken by them
are proportionately stringent. The simplest way of evading
the peril is not to cut the hair at all; and this is the
expedient adopted where the risk is thought to be more
than usually great. The Frankish kings were never allowed
to crop their hair; from their childhood upwards they had
to keep it unshorn.<note place='foot'>Agathias, <hi rend='italic'>Hist.</hi> i. 3; J. Grimm,
<hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Rechtsalterthümer</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> pp. 239
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Compare F. Kauffmann, <hi rend='italic'>Balder</hi>
(Strasburg, 1902), pp. 209 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The
story of the Phrygian king Midas, who
concealed the ears of an ass under his
long hair (Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Plutus</hi>, 287;
Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Metam.</hi> xi. 146-193) may perhaps
be a distorted reminiscence of a similar
custom in Phrygia. Parallels to the
story are recorded in modern Greece,
Ireland, Brittany, Servia, India, and
among the Mongols. See B. Schmidt,
<hi rend='italic'>Griechische Märchen, Sagen und
Volkslieder</hi>, pp. 70 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 224 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Grimm's <hi rend='italic'>Household Tales</hi>, ii. 498,
trans. by M. Hunt; Patrick Kennedy,
<hi rend='italic'>Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts</hi>,
pp. 248 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> (ed. 1866); A. de Nore,
<hi rend='italic'>Coutumes, mythes, et traditions des
provinces de la France</hi>, pp. 219 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
W. S. Karadschitsch, <hi rend='italic'>Volksmärchen
der Serben</hi>, No. 39, pp. 225 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>North Indian Notes and Queries</hi>, iii.
p. 104, § 218; B. Jülg, <hi rend='italic'>Mongolische
Märchen-Sammlung</hi>, No. 22, pp. 182
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Sagas from the Far East</hi>, No.
21, pp. 206 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> To poll the long locks that floated
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
on their shoulders would have been to renounce their right
to the throne. When the wicked brothers Clotaire and
Childebert coveted the kingdom of their dead brother
Clodomir, they inveigled into their power their little nephews,
the two sons of Clodomir; and having done so, they sent
a messenger bearing scissors and a naked sword to the
children's grandmother, Queen Clotilde, at Paris. The envoy
shewed the scissors and the sword to Clotilde, and bade
her choose whether the children should be shorn and live
or remain unshorn and die. The proud queen replied that if
her grandchildren were not to come to the throne she would
rather see them dead than shorn. And murdered they were
by their ruthless uncle Clotaire with his own hand.<note place='foot'>Gregory of Tours, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire
ecclésiastique des Francs</hi>, iii. 18, compare
vi. 24 (Guizot's translation).</note> The
king of Ponape, one of the Caroline Islands, must wear his
hair long, and so must his grandees.<note place='foot'>Dr. Hahl, <q>Mitteilungen über
Sitten und rechtliche Verhältnisse auf
Ponape,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Ethnologisches Notizblatt</hi>, ii.
Heft 2 (Berlin, 1901), p. 6.</note> The hair of the Aztec
priests hung down to their hams, so that the weight of it
became very troublesome; for they might never poll it so
long as they lived, or at least until they had been relieved
of their office on the score of old age. They wore it braided
in great tresses, six fingers broad, and tied with cotton.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Manuscrit Ramirez, Histoire de
l'origine des Indiens qui habitent la
Nouvelle Espagne</hi> (Paris, 1903), p. 171;
J. de Acosta, <hi rend='italic'>Natural and Moral
History of the Indies</hi>, ii. 365 (Hakluyt
Society); A. de Herrera, <hi rend='italic'>General History
of the vast Continent and Islands
of America</hi>, iii. 216 (Stevens's translation).
The author of the <hi rend='italic'>Manuscrit
Ramirez</hi> speaks as if the rule applied
only to the priests of the god Tezcatlipoca.</note> A
Haida medicine-man may neither clip nor comb his tresses,
so they are always long and tangled.<note place='foot'>G. M. Dawson, <q>On the Haida
Indians of Queen Charlotte Islands,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Geological Survey of Canada, Report
of Progress for 1878-79</hi>, p. 123 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note> Among the Hos,
a negro tribe of Togoland in West Africa, <q>there are priests
on whose head no razor may come during the whole of
their lives. The god who dwells in the man forbids the
cutting of his hair on pain of death. If the hair is at last
too long, the owner must pray to his god to allow him at
least to clip the tips of it. The hair is in fact conceived as
the seat and lodging-place of his god, so that were it shorn
the god would lose his abode in the priest.</q><note place='foot'>J. Spieth, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ewe-Stämme</hi>, p. 229.</note> A rain-maker at
Boroma, on the lower Zambesi, used to give out that he was
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
possessed by two spirits, one of a lion, the other of a leopard,
and in the assemblies of the people he mimicked the roaring
of these beasts. In order that their spirits might not leave
him, he never cut his hair nor drank alcohol.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Missions Catholiques</hi>, xxv. (1893)
p. 266.</note> The Masai
clan of the El Kiboron, who are believed to possess the art
of making rain, may not pluck out their beards, because the
loss of their beards would, it is supposed, entail the loss of
their rain-making powers. The head chief and the sorcerers
of the Masai observe the same rule for a like reason: they
think that were they to pull out their beards, their supernatural
gifts would desert them.<note place='foot'>M. Merker, <hi rend='italic'>Die Masai</hi> (Berlin,
1904), pp. 21, 22, 143.</note> In central Borneo
the chiefs of a particular Kayan family never allow
their hair to be shorn.<note place='foot'>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>Quer durch
Borneo</hi>, i. 68.</note> Ancient Indian law required that
when a new king had performed the ceremony of consecration
he might not shave his hair for a year, though
he was allowed to crop it. According to one account none
of his subjects, except a Brahman, might have his hair cut
during this period, and even horses were left unclipped.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Satapatha Brahmana</hi>, translated
by J. Eggeling, part iii. pp. 126, 128,
with the translator's note on p. 126
(<hi rend='italic'>Sacred Books of the East</hi>, vol. xli.).</note>
Amongst the Alfoors of Celebes the <foreign rend='italic'>Leleen</foreign> or priest who
looks after the rice-fields may not shear his hair during the
time that he exercises his special functions, that is from
a month before the rice is sown until it is housed.<note place='foot'>P. N. Wilken, <q>Bijdragen tot
de kennis van de zeden en gewoonten
der Alfoeren in de Minahassa,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap</hi>, vii. (1863) p. 126.</note> In
Usukuma, a district to the south of Lake Victoria Nyanza,
the people are forbidden to shave their heads till the corn
has been sown.<note place='foot'>R. P. Ashe, <hi rend='italic'>Two Kings of Uganda</hi>
(London, 1889), p. 109.</note> Men of the Tsetsaut tribe in British
Columbia do not cut their hair, believing that if they cut it
they would quickly grow old.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, in <hi rend='italic'>Tenth Report on the
North-Western Tribes of Canada</hi>, p. 45
(separate reprint from the <hi rend='italic'>Report of
the British Association for 1895</hi>).</note> In Ceram men do not crop
their hair: if married men did so, they would lose their wives;
if young men did so, they would grow weak and enervated.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik- en
kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en
Papua</hi>, p. 137.</note>
In Timorlaut married men may not poll their hair for the
same reason as in Ceram, but widowers and men on a
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
journey may do so after offering a fowl or a pig in sacrifice.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
292 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Malays of the Peninsula are forbidden to clip their hair
during their wife's pregnancy and for forty days after the
child has been born; and a similar abstention is said to
have been formerly incumbent on all persons prosecuting
a journey or engaged in war.<note place='foot'>W. W. Skeat, <hi rend='italic'>Malay Magic</hi>, p. 44.</note> Elsewhere men travelling
abroad have been in the habit of leaving their hair unshorn
until their return. The reason for this custom is probably
the danger to which, as we have seen, a traveller is believed
to be exposed from the magic arts of the strangers amongst
whom he sojourns; if they got possession of his shorn hair,
they might work his destruction through it. The Egyptians
on a journey kept their hair uncut till they returned home.<note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, i. 18.</note>
<q>At Tâif when a man returned from a journey his first duty
was to visit the Rabba and poll his hair.</q><note place='foot'>W. Robertson Smith, <hi rend='italic'>Kinship and
Marriage in Early Arabia</hi> (Cambridge,
1885), pp. 152 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Achilles kept
unshorn his yellow hair, because his father had vowed to
offer it to the River Sperchius if ever his son came home
from the wars beyond the sea.<note place='foot'>Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi>, xxiii. 141 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
This Homeric passage has been imitated
by Valerius Flaccus (<hi rend='italic'>Argonaut.</hi>
i. 378). The Greeks often dedicated
a lock of their hair to rivers. See
Aeschylus, <hi rend='italic'>Choephori</hi>, 5 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Philostratus,
<hi rend='italic'>Heroica</hi>, xiii. 4; Pausanias, i.
37. 3, viii. 20. 3, viii. 41. 3. The
lock might be at the side or the back of
the head or over the brow; it received
a special name (Pollux, ii. 30).</note> Formerly when Dyak
warriors returned with the heads of their enemies, each man
cut off a lock from the front of his head and threw it into
the river as a mode of ending the taboo to which they had
been subjected during the expedition.<note place='foot'>S. W. Tromp, <q>Een Dajaksch
Feest,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en
Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>,
xxxix. (1890) p. 38.</note> Bechuanas after a
battle had their hair shorn by their mothers <q>in order that
new hair might grow, and that all which was old and polluted
might disappear and be no more.</q><note place='foot'>T. Arbousset et F. Daumas, <hi rend='italic'>Relation
d'un voyage d'exploration</hi>, p. 565.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Hair
unshorn
during a
vow.
The nails
of infants
should not
be pared. Child's
hair left
unshorn as
a refuge for
its soul.</note>
Again, men who have taken a vow of vengeance sometimes
keep their hair unshorn till they have fulfilled their
vow. Thus of the Marquesans we are told that <q>occasionally
they have their head entirely shaved, except one lock on the
crown, which is worn loose or put up in a knot. But the
latter mode of wearing the hair is only adopted by them
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
when they have a solemn vow, as to revenge the death of
some near relation, etc. In such case the lock is never cut
off until they have fulfilled their promise.</q><note place='foot'>D. Porter, <hi rend='italic'>Journal of a Cruise
made to the Pacific Ocean</hi>, ii. 120.</note> A similar
custom was sometimes observed by the ancient Germans;
among the Chatti the young warriors never clipped their
hair or their beard till they had slain an enemy.<note place='foot'>Tacitus, <hi rend='italic'>Germania</hi>, 31. Vows of
the same sort were occasionally made
by the Romans (Suetonius, <hi rend='italic'>Julius</hi>, 67;
Tacitus, <hi rend='italic'>Hist.</hi> iv. 61).</note> Six
thousand Saxons once swore that they would not poll their
hair nor shave their beards until they had taken vengeance
on their foes.<note place='foot'>Paulus Diaconus, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Langobard.</hi>
iii. 7; Gregory of Tours, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire
ecclésiastique des Francs</hi>, v. 15, vol. i.
p. 268 (Guizot's translation, Nouvelle
Edition, Paris, 1874).</note> On one occasion a Hawaiian taboo is
said to have lasted thirty years, <q>during which the men
were not allowed to trim their beards, etc.</q><note place='foot'>W. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>Polynesian Researches</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
iv. 387.</note> While his
vow lasted, a Nazarite might not have his hair cut: <q>All
the days of the vow of his separation there shall no razor
come upon his head.</q><note place='foot'>Numbers vi. 5.</note> Possibly in this case there was
a special objection to touching the tabooed man's head with
iron. The Roman priests, as we have seen, were shorn with
bronze knives. The same feeling perhaps gave rise to the
European rule that a child's nails should not be pared during
the first year, but that if it is absolutely necessary to shorten
them they should be bitten off by the mother or nurse.<note place='foot'>J. A. E. Köhler, <hi rend='italic'>Volksbrauch</hi>, etc.,
<hi rend='italic'>im Voigtlande</hi>, p. 424; W. Henderson,
<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore of the Northern Counties</hi>,
pp. 16 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; F. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur
deutschen Mythologie</hi>, i. p. 258, § 23;
I. V. Zingerle, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten, Bräuche und
Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> §§ 46,
72; J. W. Wolf, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi>, i. p. 208, § 45, p. 209 § 53;
O. Knoop, <hi rend='italic'>Volkssagen, Erzählungen</hi>,
etc., <hi rend='italic'>aus dem östlichen Hinterpommern</hi>,
p. 157, § 23; E. Veckenstedt, <hi rend='italic'>Wendische
Sagen, Märchen und abergläubische
Gebräuche</hi>, p. 445; J. Haltrich, <hi rend='italic'>Zur
Volkskunde der Siebenbürger Sachsen</hi>,
p. 313; E. Krause, <q>Abergläubische
Kuren und sonstiger Aberglaube in
Berlin,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</hi>, xv.
(1883) p. 84.</note>
For in all parts of the world a young child is believed to be
especially exposed to supernatural dangers, and particular
precautions are taken to guard it against them; in other
words, the child is under a number of taboos, of which the
rule just mentioned is one. <q>Among Hindus the usual
custom seems to be that the nails of a first-born child are
cut at the age of six months. With other children a year
<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>
or two is allowed to elapse.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, ii. p.
205, § 1092.</note> The Slave, Hare, and Dogrib
Indians of North-West America do not pare the nails of female
children till they are four years of age.<note place='foot'>G. Gibbs, <q>Notes on the Tinneh
or Chepewyan Indians of British and
Russian America,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Annual Report
of the Smithsonian Institution</hi>, 1866,
p. 305; W. Dall, <hi rend='italic'>Alaska and its
Resources</hi>, p. 202. The reason alleged
by the Indians is that if the girls' nails
were cut sooner the girls would be lazy
and unable to embroider in porcupine
quill-work. But this is probably a
late invention like the reasons assigned
in Europe for the similar custom, of
which the commonest is that the child
would become a thief if its nails were
cut.</note> In Uganda a child's
hair may not be cut until the child has received a name.
Should any of it be rubbed or plucked off accidentally, it is
refastened to the child's head with string or by being knotted
to the other hair.<note place='foot'>J. Roscoe, <q>Further Notes on the
Manners and Customs of the Baganda,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxii. (1902) p. 30.</note> Amongst the Ewe negroes of the Slave
Coast, a mother sometimes vows a sacrifice to the fetish if
her infant should live. She then leaves the child unshorn
till its fourth or sixth year, when she fulfils her vow and has
the child's hair cut by a priest.<note place='foot'>Lieut. Herold, <q>Religiöse Anschauungen
und Gebräuche der deutschen
Ewe-Neger,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen aus
den Deutschen Schutzgebieten</hi>, v. 148 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> To this day a Syrian
mother will sometimes, like Hannah, devote her little one to
God. When the child reaches a certain age, its hair is cut
and weighed, and money is paid in proportion to the weight.
If the boy thus dedicated is a Moslem, he becomes in time
a dervish; if he is a Christian, he becomes a monk.<note place='foot'>S. J. Curtiss, <hi rend='italic'>Primitive Semitic
Religion To-day</hi> (Chicago, etc., 1902),
p.153.</note> Among
the Toradjas of central Celebes, when a child's hair is cut
to rid it of vermin, some locks are allowed to remain on the
crown of the head as a refuge for one of the child's souls.
Otherwise the soul would have no place in which to settle,
and the child would sicken.<note place='foot'>A. C. Kruyt, <q>Het koppensnellen
der Toradja's,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verslagen en Mededeelingen
der konink. Akademie van
Wetenschapen</hi>, Afdeeling Letterkunde,
iv. Reeks, iii. 198 n<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Amsterdam,
1899).</note> The Karo-Bataks of Sumatra
are much afraid of frightening away the soul (<foreign rend='italic'>tĕndi</foreign>) of a
child; hence when they cut its hair, they always leave a
patch unshorn, to which the soul can retreat before the
shears. Usually this lock remains unshorn all through life,
or at least up till manhood.<note place='foot'>R. Römer, <q>Bijdrage tot de Geneeskunst
der Karo-Batak's,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift
voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>,
i. (1908) p. 216.</note> In some parts of Germany it
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
is thought that if a child's hair is combed in its first year
the child will be unlucky;<note place='foot'>O. Knoop, <hi rend='italic'>Volkssagen, Erzählungen,
etc., aus dem östlichen Hinterpommern</hi>
(Posen, 1885), p. 157, § 23.</note> or that if a boy's hair is cut
before his seventh year he will have no courage.<note place='foot'>J. W. Wolf, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi>, i. p. 209, § 57.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='7. Ceremonies at Hair-cutting.'/>
<head>§ 7. Ceremonies at Hair-cutting.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Solemn
ceremonies
observed at
hair-cutting.</note>
But when it becomes necessary to crop the hair, measures
are taken to lessen the dangers which are supposed to attend
the operation. The chief of Namosi in Fiji always ate a
man by way of precaution when he had had his hair cut.
<q>There was a certain clan that had to provide the victim,
and they used to sit in solemn council among themselves to
choose him. It was a sacrificial feast to avert evil from the
chief.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. Lorimer Fison, in a letter
to the author, dated August 26,
1898.</note> This remarkable custom has been described more
fully by another observer. The old heathen temple at Namosi
is called Rukunitambua, <q>and round about it are hundreds
of stones, each of which tells a fearful tale. A subject tribe,
whose town was some little distance from Namosi, had
committed an unpardonable offence, and were condemned
to a frightful doom. The earth-mound on which their
temple had stood was planted with the mountain <foreign rend='italic'>ndalo</foreign>
(arum), and when the crop was ripe, the poor wretches had
to carry it down to Namosi, and give at least one of their
number to be killed and eaten by the chief. He used to
take advantage of these occasions to have his hair cut,
for the human sacrifice was supposed to avert all danger
of witchcraft if any ill-wisher got hold of the cuttings of his
hair, human hair being the most dangerous channel for the
deadliest spells of the sorcerers. The stones round Rukunitambua
represented these and other victims who had been
killed and eaten at Namosi. Each stone was the record of
a murder succeeded by a cannibal feast.</q><note place='foot'>From the report of a lecture
delivered in Melbourne, December
9, 1898, by the Rev. H. Worrall,
of Fiji, missionary. The newspaper
cutting from which the above extract
is quoted was sent to me by the Rev.
Lorimer Fison in a letter, dated Melbourne,
January 9, 1899. Mr. Fison
omitted to give the name and date of
the newspaper.</note> Amongst the
Maoris many spells were uttered at hair-cutting; one, for
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
example, was spoken to consecrate the obsidian knife with
which the hair was cut; another was pronounced to avert
the thunder and lightning which hair-cutting was believed to
cause.<note place='foot'>R. Taylor, <hi rend='italic'>Te Ika a Maui, or
New Zealand and its Inhabitants</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(London, 1870), pp. 206 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> <q>He who has had his hair cut is in immediate charge
of the Atua (spirit); he is removed from the contact and
society of his family and his tribe; he dare not touch his
food himself; it is put into his mouth by another person;
nor can he for some days resume his accustomed occupations
or associate with his fellow-men.</q><note place='foot'>Richard A. Cruise, <hi rend='italic'>Journal of a
Ten Months' Residence in New Zealand</hi>
(London, 1823), pp. 283 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare
J. Dumont D'Urville, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage autour du
monde et à la recherche de La Pérouse:
histoire du voyage</hi> (Paris, 1832), ii. 533.</note> The person who cuts
the hair is also tabooed; his hands having been in contact
with a sacred head, he may not touch food with them or
engage in any other employment; he is fed by another
person with food cooked over a sacred fire. He cannot be
released from the taboo before the following day, when he
rubs his hands with potato or fern root which has been
cooked on a sacred fire; and this food having been taken to
the head of the family in the female line and eaten by her,
his hands are freed from the taboo. In some parts of New
Zealand the most sacred day of the year was that appointed
for hair-cutting; the people assembled in large numbers on
that day from all the neighbourhood.<note place='foot'>E. Shortland, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions and
Superstitions of the New Zealanders</hi>,
pp. 108 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; R. Taylor, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> Sometimes a Maori
chief's hair was shorn by his wife, who was then tabooed for
a week as a consequence of having touched his sacred locks.<note place='foot'>G. F. Angas, <hi rend='italic'>Savage Life and
Scenes in Australia and New Zealand</hi>
(London, 1847), ii. 90 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
It is an affair of state when the king of Cambodia's hair is
cropped. The priests place on the barber's fingers certain old
rings set with large stones, which are supposed to contain
spirits favourable to the kings, and during the operation the
Brahmans keep up a noisy music to drive away the evil
spirits.<note place='foot'>J. Moura, <hi rend='italic'>Le Royaume du Cambodge</hi>,
i. 226 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The hair and nails of the Mikado could only be cut
while he was asleep,<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>.</note> perhaps because his soul being then
absent from his body, there was less chance of injuring it
with the shears.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremonies
at
cutting the
hair of
Siamese
children.</note>
From their earliest days little Siamese children have the
<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>
crown of the head clean shorn with the exception of a single
small tuft of hair, which is daily combed, twisted, oiled, and
tied in a little knot until the day when it is finally removed
with great pomp and ceremony. The ceremony of shaving
the top-knot takes place before the child has reached puberty,
and great anxiety is felt at this time lest the <foreign rend='italic'>kwun</foreign>, or
guardian-spirit who commonly resides in the body and
especially the head of every Siamese,<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>.</note> should be so disturbed
by the tonsure as to depart and leave the child a hopeless
wreck for life. Great pains are therefore taken to recall this
mysterious being in case he should have fled, and to fix him
securely in the child. This is the object of an elaborate
ceremony performed on the afternoon of the day when the
top-knot has been cut. A miniature pagoda is erected, and
on it are placed several kinds of food known to be favourites
of the spirit. When the <foreign rend='italic'>kwun</foreign> has arrived and is feasting
on these dainties, he is caught and held fast under a cloth
thrown over the food. The child is now placed near the
pagoda, and all the family and friends form a circle, with the
child, the captured spirit, and the Brahman priests in the
middle. Hereupon the priests address the spirit, earnestly
entreating him to enter into the child. They amuse him
with tales, and coax and wheedle him with flattery, jest, and
song; the gongs ring out their loudest; the people cheer
and only a <foreign rend='italic'>kwun</foreign> of the sourest and most obdurate disposition
could resist the combined appeal. The last sentences of
the formal invocation run as follows: <q>Benignant <foreign rend='italic'>kwun</foreign>!
Thou fickle being who art wont to wander and dally about!
From the moment that the child was conceived in the
womb, thou hast enjoyed every pleasure, until ten (lunar)
months having elapsed and the time of delivery arrived,
thou hast suffered and run the risk of perishing by being
born alive into the world. Gracious <foreign rend='italic'>kwun</foreign>! thou wast at
that time so tender, delicate, and wavering as to cause great
anxiety concerning thy fate; thou was exactly like a child,
youthful, innocent, and inexperienced. The least trifle
frightened thee and made thee shudder. In thy infantile
playfulness thou wast wont to frolic and wander to no
purpose. As thou didst commence to learn to sit, and,
<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>
unassisted, to crawl totteringly on all fours, thou wast ever
falling flat on thy face or on thy back. As thou didst grow
up in years and couldst move thy steps firmly, thou didst
begin to run and sport thoughtlessly and rashly all round
the rooms, the terrace, and bridging planks of travelling boat
or floating house, and at times thou didst fall into the
stream, creek, or pond, among the floating water-weeds, to
the utter dismay of those to whom thy existence was most
dear. O gentle <foreign rend='italic'>kwun</foreign>, come into thy corporeal abode; do
not delay this auspicious rite. Thou art now full-grown and
dost form everybody's delight and admiration. Let all the
tiny particles of <foreign rend='italic'>kwun</foreign> that have fallen on land or water
assemble and take permanent abode in this darling little
child. Let them all hurry to the site of this auspicious
ceremony and admire the magnificent preparations made for
them in this hall.</q> The brocaded cloth from the pagoda,
under which lurks the captive spirit, is now rolled up tightly
and handed to the child, who is told to clasp it firmly to
his breast and not let the <foreign rend='italic'>kwun</foreign> escape. Further, the child
drinks the milk of the coco-nuts which had been offered to
the spirit, and by thus absorbing the food of the <foreign rend='italic'>kwun</foreign>
ensures the presence of that precious spirit in his body. A
magic cord is tied round his wrist to keep off the wicked
spirits who would lure the <foreign rend='italic'>kwun</foreign> away from home; and for
three nights he sleeps with the embroidered cloth from the
pagoda fast clasped in his arms.<note place='foot'>E. Young, <hi rend='italic'>The Kingdom of the
Yellow Robe</hi> (Westminster, 1898),
pp. 64 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 67-84. I have abridged
the account of the ceremonies by
omitting some details. For an account
of the ceremonies observed at cutting
the hair of a young Siamese prince,
at the age of thirteen or fourteen,
see Mgr. Bruguière, in <hi rend='italic'>Annales de
l'Association de la Propagation de la
Foi</hi>, v. (1831) pp. 197 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='8. Disposal of Cut Hair and Nails.'/>
<head>§ 8. Disposal of Cut Hair and Nails.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Belief that
people
may be
bewitched
through
the clippings
of
their hair,
the parings
of their
nails, and
other
severed
parts
of their
persons.</note>
But even when the hair and nails have been safely cut,
there remains the difficulty of disposing of them, for their
owner believes himself liable to suffer from any harm that
may befall them. The notion that a man may be
bewitched by means of the clippings of his hair, the parings
of his nails, or any other severed portion of his person is
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>
almost world-wide,<note place='foot'>The aboriginal tribes of Central
Australia form an exception to this
rule; for among them no attempt is
made to injure a person by performing
magical ceremonies over his shorn hair.
See Spencer and Gillen, <hi rend='italic'>Northern
Tribes of Central Australia</hi>, p. 478.</note> and attested by evidence too ample,
too familiar, and too tedious in its uniformity to be here
analysed at length. The general idea on which the
superstition rests is that of the sympathetic connexion
supposed to persist between a person and everything that
has once been part of his body or in any way closely related
to him. A very few examples must suffice. They belong
to that branch of sympathetic magic which may be called
contagious.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, vol. i. pp. 52-54, 174
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Thus, when the Chilote Indians, inhabiting the
wild, deeply indented coasts and dark rain-beaten forests
of southern Chili, get possession of the hair of an enemy,
they drop it from a high tree or tie it to a piece of
seaweed and fling it into the surf; for they think that the
shock of the fall, or the blows of the waves as the tress is
tossed to and fro on the heaving billows, will be transmitted
through the hair to the person from whose head it was cut.<note place='foot'>C. Martin, <q>Über die Eingeborenen
von Chiloe,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für
Ethnologie</hi>, ix. (1877) p. 177.</note>
Dread of sorcery, we are told, formed one of the most salient
characteristics of the Marquesan islanders in the old days.
The sorcerer took some of the hair, spittle, or other bodily
refuse of the man he wished to injure, wrapped it up in a leaf,
and placed the packet in a bag woven of threads or fibres,
which were knotted in an intricate way. The whole was then
buried with certain rites, and thereupon the victim wasted away
of a languishing sickness which lasted twenty days. His life,
however, might be saved by discovering and digging up the
buried hair, spittle, or what not; for as soon as this was
done the power of the charm ceased.<note place='foot'>Vincendon-Dumoulin et C. Desgraz,
<hi rend='italic'>Îles Marquises</hi> (Paris, 1843), pp.
247 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> A Marquesan chief
told Lieutenant Gamble that he was extremely ill, the
Happah tribe having stolen a lock of his hair and buried it
in a plantain leaf for the purpose of taking his life.
Lieutenant Gamble argued with him, but in vain; die he
must unless the hair and the plantain leaf were brought back
to him; and to obtain them he had offered the Happahs the
greater part of his property. He complained of excessive
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
pain in the head, breast, and sides.<note place='foot'>D. Porter, <hi rend='italic'>Journal of a Cruise
made to the Pacific Ocean</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (New York,
1882), ii. 188.</note> A Maori sorcerer
intent on bewitching somebody sought to get a tress
of his victim's hair, the parings of his nails, some of his
spittle, or a shred of his garment. Having obtained the
object, whatever it was, he chanted certain spells and curses
over it in a falsetto voice and buried it in the ground. As
the thing decayed, the person to whom it had belonged was
supposed to waste away.<note place='foot'>R. Taylor, <hi rend='italic'>Te Ika a Maui, or
New Zealand and its Inhabitants</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp.
203 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. S. Thomson, <hi rend='italic'>The Story
of New Zealand</hi> (London, 1859), i.
116 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Again, an Australian girl, sick of
a fever, laid the blame of her illness on a young man who
had come behind her and cut off a lock of her hair; she was
sure he had buried it and that it was rotting. <q>Her hair,</q>
she said, <q>was rotting somewhere, and her <foreign rend='italic'>Marm-bu-la</foreign>
(kidney fat) was wasting away, and when her hair had
completely rotted, she would die.</q><note place='foot'>R. Brough Smyth, <hi rend='italic'>Aborigines of
Victoria</hi>, i. 468 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When an Australian
blackfellow wishes to get rid of his wife, he cuts off a lock of
her hair in her sleep, ties it to his spear-thrower, and goes with
it to a neighbouring tribe, where he gives it to a friend. His
friend sticks the spear-thrower up every night before the
camp fire, and when it falls down it is a sign that the wife
is dead.<note place='foot'>J. Dawson, <hi rend='italic'>Australian Aborigines</hi>,
p. 36.</note> The way in which the charm operates was
explained to Dr. Howitt by a Wirajuri man. <q>You see,</q>
he said, <q>when a blackfellow doctor gets hold of something
belonging to a man and roasts it with things, and sings over
it, the fire catches hold of the smell of the man, and that
settles the poor fellow.</q><note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <q>On Australian
Medicine-men,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xvi. (1887) p. 27.
Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South-East
Australia</hi>, pp. 360 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> A slightly different form of the
charm as practised in Australia is to fasten the enemy's hair
with wax to the pinion bone of a hawk, and set the bone in
a small circle of fire. According as the sorcerer desires the
death or only the sickness of his victim he leaves the bone
in the midst of the fire or removes it and lays it in the sun.
When he thinks he has done his enemy enough harm, he
places the bone in water, which ends the enchantment.<note place='foot'>E. Palmer, <q>Notes on some Australian
Tribes,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xiii. (1884) p. 293.</note>
<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>
Lucian describes how a Syrian witch professed to bring back
a faithless lover to his forsaken fair one by means of a lock
of his hair, his shoes, his garments, or something of that
sort. She hung the hair, or whatever it was, on a peg and
fumigated it with brimstone, sprinkling salt on the fire and
mentioning the names of the lover and his lass. Then she
drew a magic wheel from her bosom and set it spinning,
while she gabbled a spell full of barbarous and fearsome
words. This soon brought the false lover back to the feet of
his charmer.<note place='foot'>Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>Dial. meretr.</hi> iv. 4 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Apuleius tells how an amorous Thessalian witch
essayed to win the affections of a handsome Boeotian youth by
similar means. As darkness fell she mounted the roof, and
there, surrounded by a hellish array of dead men's bones, she
knotted the severed tresses of auburn hair and threw them on
the glowing embers of a perfumed fire. But her cunning handmaid
had outwitted her; the hair was only goat's hair; and
all her enchantments ended in dismal and ludicrous failure.<note place='foot'>Apuleius, <hi rend='italic'>Metamorph.</hi> iii. 16 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
For more evidence of the same sort, see
Th. Williams, <hi rend='italic'>Fiji and the Fijians</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i.
248; James Bonwick, <hi rend='italic'>Daily Life of the
Tasmanians</hi>, p. 178; James Chalmers,
<hi rend='italic'>Pioneering in New Guinea</hi>, p. 187;
J. S. Polack, <hi rend='italic'>Manners and Customs of
the New Zealanders</hi>, i. 282; A. Bastian,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen Asien</hi>, iii.
270; G. H. von Langsdorff, <hi rend='italic'>Reise um
die Welt</hi>, i. 134 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>Polynesian
Researches</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. 364; A. B. Ellis,
<hi rend='italic'>Ewe-speaking peoples of the Slave Coast</hi>,
p. 99; R. H. Codrington, <hi rend='italic'>The
Melanesians</hi>, p. 203; K. von den
Steinen, <hi rend='italic'>Unter den Naturvölkern Zentral-Brasiliens</hi>,
p. 343; Miss Mary H.
Kingsley, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in West Africa</hi>, p.
447; I. V. Zingerle, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten, Bräuche
und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
§ 178; R. Andree, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographische
Parallelen und Vergleiche</hi>, Neue Folge,
pp. 12 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; E. S. Hartland, <hi rend='italic'>Legend
of Perseus</hi>, ii. 64-74, 132-139.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Clipped
hair may
cause headache.</note>
The Huzuls of the Carpathians imagine that if mice get
a person's shorn hair and make a nest of it, the person will
suffer from headache or even become idiotic.<note place='foot'>R. F. Kaindl, <q>Neue Beiträge
zur Ethnologie und Volkeskunde der
Huzulen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxix. (1896) p. 94.</note> Similarly in
Germany it is a common notion that if birds find a person's
cut hair, and build their nests with it, the person will suffer
from headache;<note place='foot'>E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten
und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</hi>, p. 509;
A. Birlinger, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches aus
Schwaben</hi>, i. 493; F. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag
zur deutschen Mythologie</hi>, i. 258; J. A.
E. Köhler, <hi rend='italic'>Volksbrauch</hi>, etc., <hi rend='italic'>im
Voigtlande</hi>, p. 425; A. Witzschel,
<hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus
Thüringen</hi>, p. 282; I. V. Zingerle,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> § 180; J. W. Wolf, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge
zur deutschen Mythologie</hi>, i. p. 224,
§ 273. A similar belief prevails among
the gypsies of Eastern Europe (H. von
Wlislocki, <hi rend='italic'>Volksglaube und religiöser
Brauch der Zigeuner</hi>, p. 81).</note> sometimes it is thought that he will have
an eruption on the head.<note place='foot'>I. V. Zingerle, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> § 181.</note> The same superstition prevails,
<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>
or used to prevail, in West Sussex. <q>I knew how it would
be,</q> exclaimed a maidservant one day, <q>when I saw that
bird fly off with a bit of my hair in its beak that blew out
of the window this morning when I was dressing; I knew I
should have a clapping headache, and so I have.</q><note place='foot'>Charlotte Latham, <q>Some West
Sussex Superstitions,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Record</hi>,
i. (1878) p. 40.</note> In like
manner the Scottish Highlanders believe that if cut or loose
hair is allowed to blow away with the wind and it passes
over an empty nest, or a bird takes it to its nest, the head
from which it came will ache.<note place='foot'>J. G. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Superstitions of
the Highlands and Islands of Scotland</hi>
(Glasgow, 1900), p. 237.</note> The Todas of southern India
hide their clipped hair in bushes or hollows in the rocks, in
order that it may not be found by crows, and they bury the
parings of their nails lest they should be eaten by buffaloes,
with whom, it is believed, they would disagree.<note place='foot'>W. H. R. Rivers, <hi rend='italic'>The Todas</hi>
(London, 1906), pp. 268 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Cut hair
may cause
rain, hail,
thunder
and lightning. Magical
uses of
cut hair.</note>
Again it is thought that cut or combed-out hair may
disturb the weather by producing rain and hail, thunder and
lightning. We have seen that in New Zealand a spell was
uttered at hair-cutting to avert thunder and lightning. In the
Tyrol, witches are supposed to use cut or combed-out hair to
make hailstones or thunderstorms with.<note place='foot'>I. V. Zingerle, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> §§ 176, 179.</note> Thlinkeet Indians
have been known to attribute stormy weather to the rash
act of a girl who had combed her hair outside of the house.<note place='foot'>A. Krause, <hi rend='italic'>Die Tlinkit-Indianer</hi>
(Jena, 1885), p. 300.</note>
The Romans seem to have held similar views, for it was a
maxim with them that no one on shipboard should cut his
hair or nails except in a storm,<note place='foot'>Petronius, <hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> 104.</note> that is, when the mischief
was already done. In the Highlands of Scotland it is said
that no sister should comb her hair at night if she have a
brother at sea.<note place='foot'>J. G. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 236
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In West Africa, when the Mani of Chitombe
or Jumba died, the people used to run in crowds to the
corpse and tear out his hair, teeth, and nails, which they
kept as a rain-charm, believing that otherwise no rain would
fall. The Makoko of the Anzikos begged the missionaries
to give him half their beards as a rain-charm.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsche Expedition
an der Loango-Küste</hi>, i. 231 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Ein Besuch in San Salvador</hi>, pp. 117
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When
Du Chaillu had his hair cut among the Ashira of West
<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>
Africa, the people scuffled and fought for the clippings of
his hair, even the aged king himself taking part in the
scrimmage. Every one who succeeded in getting some
of the hairs wrapped them up carefully and went off in
triumph. When the traveller, who was regarded as a spirit
by these simple-minded folk, asked the king what use the
clippings could be to him, his sable majesty replied, <q>Oh,
spirit! these hairs are very precious; we shall make <foreign rend='italic'>mondas</foreign>
(fetiches) of them, and they will bring other white men to
us, and bring us great good luck and riches. Since you
have come to us, oh spirit! we have wished to have some
of your hair, but did not dare to ask for it, not knowing
that it could be cut.</q><note place='foot'>P. B. du Chaillu, <hi rend='italic'>Explorations
and Adventures in Equatorial Africa</hi>
(London, 1861), pp. 426 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Wabondei of eastern Africa
preserve the hair and nails of their dead chiefs and
use them both for the making of rain and the healing
of the sick.<note place='foot'>O. Baumann, <hi rend='italic'>Usambara und
seine Nachbargebiete</hi> (Berlin, 1891),
p. 141.</note> The hair, beard, and nails of their deceased
chiefs are the most sacred possession, the most precious
treasure of the Baronga of south-eastern Africa. Preserved
in pellets of cow-dung wrapt round with leathern
thongs, they are kept in a special hut under the charge
of a high priest, who offers sacrifices and prayers at
certain seasons, and has to observe strict continence for a
month before he handles these holy relics in the offices of
religion. A terrible drought was once the result of this
palladium falling into the hands of the enemy.<note place='foot'>A. Junod, <hi rend='italic'>Les Ba-Ronga</hi> (Neuchâtel,
1898), pp. 398-400.</note> In some
Victorian tribes the sorcerer used to burn human hair in
time of drought; it was never burned at other times for fear
of causing a deluge of rain. Also when the river was low,
the sorcerer would place human hair in the stream to
increase the supply of water.<note place='foot'>W. Stanbridge, <q>On the Aborigines
of Victoria,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the
Ethnological Society of London</hi>, N.S.,
i. (1861) p. 300.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Cut hair
and nails
may be
used as
hostages
for good
behaviour
of the
persons
from whose
bodies they
have been
taken.</note>
If cut hair and nails remain in sympathetic connexion
with the person from whose body they have been severed,
it is clear that they can be used as hostages for his good
behaviour by any one who may chance to possess them;
for on the principles of contagious magic he has only to
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
injure the hair or nails in order to hurt simultaneously
their original owner. Hence when the Nandi have taken
a prisoner they shave his head and keep the shorn hair as
a surety that he will not attempt to escape; but when the
captive is ransomed, they return his shorn hair with him
to his own people.<note place='foot'>A. C. Hollis, <hi rend='italic'>The Nandi</hi> (Oxford,
1909), pp. 30, 74 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> For a similar reason, perhaps, when the
Tiaha, an Arab tribe of Moab, have taken a prisoner whom
they do not wish to put to death, they shave one corner of
his head above his temples and let him go. So, too, an
Arab of Moab who pardons a murderer will sometimes
cut off the man's hair and shave his chin before releasing
him. Again, when two Moabite Arabs had got hold of a
traitor who had revealed their plan of campaign to the
enemy, they contented themselves with shaving completely
one side of his head and his moustache on the other,
after which they set him at liberty.<note place='foot'>Le P. A. Jaussen, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes des
Arabes au pays de Moab</hi> (Paris, 1908),
pp. 94 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> We can now, perhaps,
understand why Hanun King of Ammon shaved off one-half
of the beards of King David's messengers and cut
off half their garments before he sent them back to their
master.<note place='foot'>2 Samuel, x. 4.</note> His intention, we may conjecture, was not simply
to put a gross affront on the envoys. He distrusted the
ambitious designs of King David and wished to have some
guarantee of the maintenance of peace and friendly relations
between the two countries. That guarantee he may have
imagined that he possessed in half of the beards and
garments of the ambassadors; and if that was so, we may
suppose that when the indignant David set the army of
Israel in motion against Ammon, and the fords of Jordan
were alive with the passage of his troops, the wizards of
Ammon were busy in the strong keep of Rabbah muttering
their weird spells and performing their quaint enchantments
over the shorn hair and severed skirts in order to dispel the
thundercloud of war that was gathering black about their
country. Vain hopes! The city fell, and from the gates
the sad inhabitants trooped forth in thousands to be laid
in long lines on the ground and sawed asunder or ripped
up with harrows or to walk into the red glow of the
<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>
burning brick kilns.<note place='foot'>2 Samuel, x., xii. 26-31.</note> Again, the parings of nails may serve
the same purpose as the clippings of hair; they too may
be treated as bail for the good behaviour of the persons
from whose fingers they have been cut. It is apparently
on this principle that when the Ba-yaka of the Congo
valley cement a peace, the chiefs of the two tribes meet
and eat a cake which contains some of their nail-parings
as a pledge of the maintenance of the treaty. They believe
that he who breaks an engagement contracted in this solemn
manner will die.<note place='foot'>R. Torday and T. A. Joyce,
<q>Notes on the Ethnography of the
Ba-Yaka,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxxvi. (1906) p. 49.</note> Each of the high contracting parties has
in fact given hostages to fortune in the shape of the nail-parings
which are lodged in the other man's stomach.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Cut hair
and nails
are deposited
in
sacred
places,
such as
temples
and cemeteries,
to
preserve
them from
injury. Cut hair
and nails
buried
under
certain
trees or
deposited
among the
branches.</note>
To preserve the cut hair and nails from injury and from
the dangerous uses to which they may be put by sorcerers,
it is necessary to deposit them in some safe place. Hence
the natives of the Maldives carefully keep the cuttings of
their hair and nails and bury them, with a little water, in
the cemeteries; <q>for they would not for the world tread
upon them nor cast them in the fire, for they say that they
are part of their body, and demand burial as it does; and,
indeed, they fold them neatly in cotton; and most of them
like to be shaved at the gates of temples and mosques.</q><note place='foot'>François Pyrard, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages to the
East Indies, the Maldives, the Moluccas,
and Brazil</hi>, translated by Albert Gray
(Hakluyt Society, 1887), i. 110 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
In New Zealand the severed hair was deposited on some
sacred spot of ground <q>to protect it from being touched
accidentally or designedly by any one.</q><note place='foot'>E. Shortland, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions and
Superstitions of the New Zealanders</hi>,
p. 110.</note> The shorn locks
of a chief were gathered with much care and placed in an
adjoining cemetery.<note place='foot'>J. S. Polack, <hi rend='italic'>Manners and Customs
of the New Zealanders</hi>, i. 38 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
Compare G. F. Angas, <hi rend='italic'>Savage Life
and Scenes in Australia and New
Zealand</hi> (London, 1847), ii. 108 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Tahitians buried the cuttings of
their hair at the temples.<note place='foot'>James Wilson, <hi rend='italic'>A Missionary Voyage
to the Southern Pacific Ocean</hi>
(London, 1799), p. 355.</note> In the streets of Soku, West
Africa, a modern traveller observed cairns of large stones
piled against walls with tufts of human hair inserted in the
crevices. On asking the meaning of this, he was told that
when any native of the place polled his hair he carefully
<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>
gathered up the clippings and deposited them in one of these
cairns, all of which were sacred to the fetish and therefore
inviolable. These cairns of sacred stones, he further learned,
were simply a precaution against witchcraft, for if a man
were not thus careful in disposing of his hair, some of it
might fall into the hands of his enemies, who would, by
means of it, be able to cast spells over him and so compass
his destruction.<note place='foot'>R. A. Freeman, <hi rend='italic'>Travels and Life
in Ashanti and Jaman</hi> (Westminster,
1898), pp. 171 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When the top-knot of a Siamese child has
been cut with great ceremony, the short hairs are put into
a little vessel made of plantain leaves and set adrift on the
nearest river or canal. As they float away, all that was
wrong or harmful in the child's disposition is believed to
depart with them. The long hairs are kept till the child
makes a pilgrimage to the holy Footprint of Buddha on the
sacred hill at Prabat. They are then presented to the
priests, who are supposed to make them into brushes with
which they sweep the Footprint; but in fact so much hair
is thus offered every year that the priests cannot use it all,
so they quietly burn the superfluity as soon as the pilgrims'
backs are turned.<note place='foot'>E. Young, <hi rend='italic'>The Kingdom of the
Yellow Robe</hi>, p. 79.</note> The cut hair and nails of the Flamen
Dialis were buried under a lucky tree.<note place='foot'>Aulus Gellius, x. 15. 15. The
ancients were not agreed as to the distinction
between lucky and unlucky
trees. According to Cato and Pliny,
trees that bore fruit were lucky, and
trees which did not were unlucky
(Festus, ed. C. O. Müller, p. 29, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Felices</hi>; Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xvi. 108);
but according to Tarquitius Priscus
those trees were unlucky which were
sacred to the infernal gods and bore
black berries or black fruit (Macrobius,
<hi rend='italic'>Saturn</hi>, ii. 16, but iii. 20 in L. Jan's
edition, Quedlinburg and Leipsic,
1852).</note> The shorn tresses
of the Vestal virgins were hung on an ancient lotus-tree.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xvi. 235; Festu,
p. 57 ed. C. O. Müller, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Capillatam
vel capillarem arborem</hi>.</note>
In Morocco women often hang their cut hair on a tree that
grows on or near the grave of a wonder-working saint; for
they think thus to rid themselves of headache or to guard
against it.<note place='foot'>M. Quedenfelt, <q>Aberglaube und
halbreligiöse Bruderschaft bei den
Marokkanern,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen der
Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie,
Ethnologie und Urgeschichte</hi>, 1886, p.
(680).</note> In Germany the clippings of hair used often to
be buried under an elder-bush.<note place='foot'>A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
pp. 294 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, § 464.</note> In Oldenburg cut hair and
nails are wrapt in a cloth which is deposited in a hole in an
<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>
elder-tree three days before the new moon; the hole is then
plugged up.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Germanische Mythen</hi>
(Berlin, 1858), p. 630.</note> In the West of Northumberland it is thought
that if the first parings of a child's nails are buried under an
ash-tree, the child will turn out a fine singer.<note place='foot'>W. Henderson, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore of the
Northern Counties</hi> (London, 1879),
p. 17.</note> In Amboyna,
before a child may taste sago-pap for the first time, the
father cuts off a lock of the infant's hair, which he buries
under a sago-palm.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik- en
kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en
Papua</hi>, p. 74.</note> In the Aru Islands, when a child is
able to run alone, a female relation shears a lock of its
hair and deposits it on a banana-tree.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 265.</note> In the island of
Rotti it is thought that the first hair which a child gets is
not his own, and that, if it is not cut off, it will make him
weak and ill. Hence, when the child is about a month old,
his hair is polled with much ceremony. As each of the
friends who are invited to the ceremony enters the house he
goes up to the child, snips off a little of its hair and drops it
into a coco-nut shell full of water. Afterwards the father
or another relation takes the hair and packs it into a little
bag made of leaves, which he fastens to the top of a palm-tree.
Then he gives the leaves of the palm a good shaking,
climbs down, and goes home without speaking to any one.<note place='foot'>G. Heijmering, <q>Zeden en gewoonten
op het eiland Rottie,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift
voor Neêrlands Indië</hi>, 1843, dl. ii. pp.
634-637.</note>
Indians of the Yukon territory, Alaska, do not throw away
their cut hair and nails, but tie them up in little bundles
and place them in the crotches of trees or wherever they are
not likely to be disturbed by beasts. For <q>they have a
superstition that disease will follow the disturbance of such
remains by animals.</q><note place='foot'>W. Dall, <hi rend='italic'>Alaska and its Resources</hi>
(London, 1870), p. 54; F. Whymper,
<q>The Natives of the Youkon River,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the Ethnological Society
of London</hi>, N.S., vii. (1869) p.
174.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Cut hair
and nails
may be
stowed
away for
safety in
any secret
place.</note>
Often the clipped hair and nails are stowed away in any
secret place, not necessarily in a temple or cemetery or at
a tree, as in the cases already mentioned. Thus in Swabia
you are recommended to deposit your clipped hair in some
spot where neither sun nor moon can shine on it, for example
in the earth or under a stone.<note place='foot'>E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten
und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</hi>, p.
509; A. Birlinger, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches aus
Schwaben</hi>, i. 493.</note> In Danzig it is buried in a
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
bag under the threshold.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Germanische Mythen</hi>,
p. 630.</note> In Ugi, one of the Solomon
Islands, men bury their hair lest it should fall into the hands
of an enemy who would make magic with it and so bring
sickness or calamity on them.<note place='foot'>H. B. Guppy, <hi rend='italic'>The Solomon Islands
and their Natives</hi> (London, 1887), p.
54.</note> The same fear seems to be
general in Melanesia, and has led to a regular practice of
hiding cut hair and nails.<note place='foot'>R. H. Codrington, <hi rend='italic'>The Melanesians</hi>,
p. 203.</note> In Fiji, the shorn hair is concealed
in the thatch of the house.<note place='foot'>Th. Williams, <hi rend='italic'>Fiji and the Fijians</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
i. 249.</note> Most Burmese and Shans tie
the combings of their hair and the parings of their nails to a
stone and sink them in deep water or bury them in the
ground.<note place='foot'>J. G. Scott and J. P. Hardiman,
<hi rend='italic'>Gazetteer of Upper Burma and the Shan
States</hi>, part i. vol. ii. p. 37.</note> The Zend-Avesta directs that the clippings of hair
and the parings of nails shall be placed in separate holes,
and that three, six, or nine furrows shall be drawn round
each hole with a metal knife.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Zend-Avesta, Vendîdâd</hi>
Fargaard, xvii. (vol. i. pp. 186 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>,
translated by J. Darmesteter, <hi rend='italic'>Sacred
Books of the East</hi>, vol. iv.).</note> In the <hi rend='italic'>Grihya-Sûtras</hi> it is
provided that the hair cut from a child's head at the end of
the first, third, fifth, or seventh year shall be buried in the
earth at a place covered with grass or in the neighbourhood
of water.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Grihya-Sûtras</hi>, translated by H.
Oldenberg, part i. p. 57; compare
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, pp. 303, 399, part ii. p. 62 (<hi rend='italic'>Sacred
Books of the East</hi>, vols. xxix., xxx.).
Compare H. Oldenberg, <hi rend='italic'>Die Religion
des Veda</hi>, p. 487.</note> At the end of the period of his studentship a
Brahman has his hair shaved and his nails cut; and a person
who is kindly disposed to him gathers the shorn hair and
the clipped nails, puts them in a lump of bull's dung, and
buries them in a cow-stable or near an <foreign rend='italic'>adumbara</foreign> tree or in
a clump of <foreign rend='italic'>darbha</foreign> grass, with the words, <q>Thus I hide the
sins of So-and-so.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Grihya-Sûtras</hi>, translated by H.
Oldenberg, part ii. pp. 165 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
218.</note> The Madi or Moru tribe of central
Africa bury the parings of their nails in the ground.<note place='foot'>R. W. Felkin, <q>Notes on the
Madi or Moru Tribe of Central Africa,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the Royal Society of
Edinburgh</hi>, xii. (1882-84) p. 332.</note> In
Uganda grown people throw away the clippings of their
hair, but carefully bury the parings of their nails.<note place='foot'>Fr. Stuhlmann, <hi rend='italic'>Mit Emin Pascha
ins Herz von Afrika</hi>, p. 185 note.
The same thing was told me in conversation
by the Rev. J. Roscoe,
missionary to Uganda; but I understood
him to mean that the hair was
not carelessly disposed of, but thrown
away in some place where it would not
easily be found.</note> The A-lur
<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>
are careful to collect and bury both their hair and nails in
safe places.<note place='foot'>Fr. Stuhlmann, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 516
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The same practice prevails among many tribes
of South Africa, from a fear lest wizards should get hold of
the severed particles and work evil with them.<note place='foot'>J. Macdonald, <hi rend='italic'>Light in Africa</hi>, p.
209; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Manners, Customs, Superstitions
and Religions of South African
Tribes,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xx. (1891) p. 131.</note> The Caffres
carry still further this dread of allowing any portion of themselves
to fall into the hands of an enemy; for not only do
they bury their cut hair and nails in a secret spot, but when
one of them cleans the head of another he preserves the
vermin which he catches, <q>carefully delivering them to the
person to whom they originally appertained, supposing, according
to their theory, that as they derived their support
from the blood of the man from whom they were taken,
should they be killed by another, the blood of his neighbour
would be in his possession, thus placing in his hands the
power of some superhuman influence.</q><note place='foot'>A. Steedman, <hi rend='italic'>Wanderings and
Adventures in the Interior of Southern
Africa</hi> (London, 1835), i. 266.</note> Amongst the
Wanyoro of central Africa all cuttings of the hair and nails
are carefully stored under the bed and afterwards strewed
about among the tall grass.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Emin Pasha in Central Africa,
being a Collection of his Letters and
Journals</hi> (London, 1888), p. 74.</note> Similarly the Wahoko of
central Africa take pains to collect their cut hair and nails
and scatter them in the forest.<note place='foot'>Fr. Stuhlmann, <hi rend='italic'>Mit Emin Pascha
ins Herz von Afrika</hi>, p. 625.</note> The Asa, a branch of the
Masai, hide the clippings of their hair and the parings of
their nails or throw them away far from the kraal, lest a
sorcerer should get hold of them and make their original
owners ill by his magic.<note place='foot'>M. Merkel, <hi rend='italic'>Die Masai</hi> (Berlin,
1904), p. 243.</note> In North Guinea the parings of the
finger-nails and the shorn locks of the head are scrupulously
concealed, lest they be converted into a charm for the
destruction of the person to whom they belong.<note place='foot'>J. L. Wilson, <hi rend='italic'>Western Africa</hi>, p.
215.</note> For
the same reason the clipped hair and nail-parings of
chiefs in Southern Nigeria are secretly buried.<note place='foot'>Ch. Partridge, <hi rend='italic'>Cross River Natives</hi>
(London, 1905), pp. 8, 203 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among
the Thompson Indians of British Columbia loose hair was
buried, hidden, or thrown into the water, because, if an
<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>
enemy got hold of it, he might bewitch the owner.<note place='foot'>James Teit, <q>The Thompson River
Indians of British Columbia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Memoir
of the American Museum of Natural
History, The Jesup North Pacific
Expedition</hi>, vol. i. part iv. (April
1900) p. 360.</note> In
Bolang Mongondo, a district of western Celebes, the first
hair cut from a child's head is kept in a young coco-nut,
which is commonly hung on the front of the house, under
the roof.<note place='foot'>N. P. Wilken en J. A. Schwarz,
<q>Allerlei over het land en volk van
Bolaang Mongondou,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xi. (1867) p. 322.</note> To spit upon the hair before throwing it away is
thought in some parts of Europe to be a sufficient safeguard
against its use by witches.<note place='foot'>I. V. Zingerle, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten, Bräuche
und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Innsbruck, 1871), §§ 176, 580;
<hi rend='italic'>Mélusine</hi>, 1878, col. 79; E. Monseur,
<hi rend='italic'>Le Folklore Wallon</hi>, p. 91.</note> Spitting as a protective charm
is well known.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi>, xxviii. 35;
Theophrastus, <hi rend='italic'>Characters</hi>, <q>The Superstitious
Man</q>; Theocritus, <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> vi. 39,
vii. 127; Persius, <hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> ii. 31 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> At
the siege of Danzig in 1734, when the
old wives saw a bomb coming, they
used to spit thrice and cry, <q>Fi, ti, fi,
there comes the dragon!</q> in the persuasion
that this secured them against
being hit (Tettau und Temme, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Volkssagen Ostpreussens, Litthauens
und Westpreussens</hi> (Berlin, 1837), p.
284). For more examples, see J. E. B.
Mayor on Juvenal, <hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> vii. 112; J. E.
Crombie, <q>The Saliva Superstition,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>International Folk-lore Congress</hi>, 1891,
<hi rend='italic'>Papers and Transactions</hi>, pp. 249 sq.;
C. de Mensignac, <hi rend='italic'>Recherches ethnographiques
sur la salive et le crachat</hi>
(Bordeaux, 1892), pp. 50 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; F. W.
Nicolson, <q>The Saliva Superstition in
Classical Literature,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Harvard Studies
in Classical Philology</hi>, viii. (1897) pp.
35 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Cut hair
and nails
kept
against the
resurrection.</note>
Sometimes the severed hair and nails are preserved, not
to prevent them from falling into the hands of a magician,
but that the owner may have them at the resurrection of the
body, to which some races look forward. Thus the Incas
of Peru <q>took extreme care to preserve the nail-parings and
the hairs that were shorn off or torn out with a comb;
placing them in holes or niches in the walls; and if they fell
out, any other Indian that saw them picked them up and
put them in their places again. I very often asked different
Indians, at various times, why they did this, in order to see
what they would say, and they all replied in the same words
saying, <q>Know that all persons who are born must return to
life</q> (they have no word to express resuscitation), <q>and the
souls must rise out of their tombs with all that belonged to
their bodies. We, therefore, in order that we may not have
to search for our hair and nails at a time when there will be
much hurry and confusion, place them in one place, that
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>
they may be brought together more conveniently, and,
whenever it is possible, we are also careful to spit in one
place.</q></q><note place='foot'>Garcilasso de la Vega, <hi rend='italic'>First Part
of the Royal Commentaries of the Yncas</hi>,
bk. ii. ch. 7 (vol. i. p. 127, Markham's
translation).</note> In Chili this custom of stuffing the shorn hair
into holes in the wall is still observed, it being thought the
height of imprudence to throw the hair away.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Mélusine</hi>, 1878, coll. 583 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Similarly
the Turks never throw away the parings of their nails, but
carefully stow them in cracks of the walls or of the boards,
in the belief that they will be needed at the resurrection.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The People of Turkey</hi>, by a Consul's
daughter and wife, ii. 250.</note>
The Armenians do not throw away their cut hair and nails
and extracted teeth, but hide them in places that are
esteemed holy, such as a crack in the church wall, a pillar
of the house, or a hollow tree. They think that all these
severed portions of themselves will be wanted at the resurrection,
and that he who has not stowed them away in a
safe place will have to hunt about for them on the great
day.<note place='foot'>M. Abeghian, <hi rend='italic'>Der armenische
Volksglaube</hi>, p. 68.</note> With the same intention the Macedonians bury the
parings of their nails in a hole,<note place='foot'>G. F. Abbott, <hi rend='italic'>Macedonian Folklore</hi>
(Cambridge, 1903), p. 214.</note> and devout Moslems in
Morocco hide them in a secret place.<note place='foot'>M. Quedenfelt, <q>Aberglaube und
halbreligiöse Bruderschaft bei den
Marokkanern,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen der
Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie,
Ethnologie und Urgeschichte</hi>, 1886,
p. (680).</note> Similarly the
Arabs of Moab bestow the parings of their nails in the crannies
of walls, where they are sanguine enough to expect to find
them when they appear before their Maker.<note place='foot'>Le P. A. Jaussen, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes des
Arabes au pays de Moab</hi> (Paris, 1908),
p. 94 note <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>.</note> Some of the
Esthonians keep the parings of their finger and toe nails
in their bosom, in order to have them at hand when they
are asked for them at the day of judgment.<note place='foot'>Boecler-Kreutzwald, <hi rend='italic'>Der Ehsten
abergläubische Gebräuche, Weisen und
Gewohnheiten</hi>, p. 139; F. J. Wiedemann,
<hi rend='italic'>Aus dem innern und äussern
Leben der Ehsten</hi>, p. 491.</note> In a like
spirit peasants of the Vosges will sometimes bury their
extracted teeth secretly, marking the spot well so that they
may be able to walk straight to it on the resurrection day.<note place='foot'>L. F. Sauvé, <hi rend='italic'>Le Folk-lore des
Hautes-Vosges</hi> (Paris, 1889), p. 41.</note>
In the village of Drumconrath, near Abbeyleix, in Ireland,
there used to be some old women who, having ascertained
from Scripture that the hairs of their heads were all
<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
numbered by the Almighty, expected to have to account
for them at the day of judgment. In order to be able to
do so they stuffed the severed hair away in the thatch of
their cottages.<note place='foot'>Miss A. H. Singleton, in a letter
to me, dated Rathmoyle House,
Abbeyleix, Ireland, 24th February
1904.</note> In Abyssinia men who have had their
hands or feet cut off are careful to dry the severed limbs
over a fire and preserve them in butter for the purpose of
being buried with them in the grave. Thus they expect to
get up with all their limbs complete at the general rising.<note place='foot'>Dr. Antoine Petit, in Th. Lefebvre,
<hi rend='italic'>Voyage en Abyssinie</hi>, i. 373.</note>
The pains taken by the Chinese to preserve corpses entire
and free from decay seems to rest on a firm belief in the
resurrection of the dead; hence it is natural to find their
ancient books laying down a rule that the hair, nails, and
teeth which have fallen out during life should be buried with
the dead in the coffin, or at least in the grave.<note place='foot'>J. J. M. de Groot, <hi rend='italic'>The Religious
System of China</hi>, i. 342 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (Leyden,
1892).</note> The Fors
of central Africa object to cut any one else's nails, for
should the part cut off be lost and not delivered into its
owner's hands, it will have to be made up to him somehow
or other after death. The parings are buried in the ground.<note place='foot'>R. W. Felkin, <q>Notes on the
For Tribe of Central Africa,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings
of the Royal Society of Edinburgh</hi>,
xiii. (1884-86) p. 230.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Cut hair
and nails
burnt to
prevent
them from
falling
into the
hands of
sorcerers.</note>
Some people burn their loose hair to save it from falling
into the hands of sorcerers. This is done by the Patagonians
and some of the Victorian tribes.<note place='foot'>A. D'Orbigny, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage dans l'Amérique
méridionale</hi>, ii. 93; Lieut. Musters,
<q>On the Races of Patagonia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Anthropological Institute</hi>, i.
(1872) p. 197; J. Dawson, <hi rend='italic'>Australian
Aborigines</hi>, p. 36. The Patagonians
sometimes throw their hair into a river
instead of burning it.</note> In the Upper Vosges
they say that you should never leave the clippings of your
hair and nails lying about, but burn them to hinder the
sorcerers from using them against you.<note place='foot'>L. F. Sauvé, <hi rend='italic'>Le Folk-lore des
Hautes-Vosges</hi>, p. 170.</note> For the same
reason Italian women either burn their loose hairs or throw
them into a place where no one is likely to look for them.<note place='foot'>Z. Zanetti, <hi rend='italic'>La Medicina delle
nostre donne</hi> (Città di Castello, 1892),
pp. 234 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
The almost universal dread of witchcraft induces the West
African negroes, the Makololo of South Africa, and the
Tahitians to burn or bury their shorn hair.<note place='foot'>A. B. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>The Ewe-speaking
Peoples of the Slave Coast</hi>, p. 99; Miss
Mary H. Kingsley, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in West
Africa</hi>, p. 447; R. H. Nassau, <hi rend='italic'>Fetichism
in West Africa</hi> (London, 1904),
p. 83; A. F. Mockler-Ferryman,
<hi rend='italic'>British Nigeria</hi> (London, 1902),
p. 286; David Livingstone, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative
of Expedition to the Zambesi</hi>, pp. 46
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>Polynesian Researches</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
i. 365. In some parts of New Guinea
cut hair is destroyed for the same
reason (H. H. Romilly, <hi rend='italic'>From my
Verandah in New Guinea</hi>, London,
1889, p. 83).</note> For the
<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>
same reason the natives of Uap, one of the Caroline
Islands, either burn or throw into the sea the clippings
of their hair and the parings of their nails.<note place='foot'>W. H. Furness, <hi rend='italic'>The Island of
Stone Money, Uap of the Carolines</hi>
(Philadelphia and London, 1910),
P. 137.</note> One of the
pygmies who roam through the gloomy depths of the vast
central African forests has been seen to collect carefully the
clippings of his hair in a packet of banana leaves and keep
them till next morning, when, the camp breaking up for the
day's march, he threw them into the hot ashes of the abandoned
fire.<note place='foot'>Fr. Stuhlmann, <hi rend='italic'>Mit Emin Pascha
ins Herz von Afrika</hi>, p. 451.</note> Australian aborigines of the Proserpine River,
in Queensland, burn a woman's cut hair to prevent it from
getting into a man's bag; for if it did, the woman would
fall ill.<note place='foot'>W. E. Roth, <hi rend='italic'>North Queensland
Ethnography, Bulletin No. 5</hi> (Brisbane,
1903), p. 21.</note> When an English officer had cut off a lock of hair
of a Fuegian woman, the men of her party were angry, and
one of them, taking the lock away, threw half of it into the
fire and swallowed the rest. <q>Immediately afterwards,
placing his hands to the fire, as if to warm them, and
looking upwards, he uttered a few words, apparently of
invocation: then, looking at us, pointed upwards, and exclaimed,
with a tone and gesture of explanation, <q><foreign rend='italic'>Pecheray,
Pecheray</foreign>.</q> After which they cut off some hair from several
of the officers who were present, and repeated a similar
ceremony.</q><note place='foot'>Captain R. Fitzroy, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of
the Surveying Voyages of His Majesty's
Ships Adventure and Beagle</hi>, i. (London,
1839). pp. 313 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Thompson Indians used to burn the
parings of their nails, because if an enemy got possession
of the parings he might bewitch the person to whom they
belonged.<note place='foot'>J. Teit, <q>The Thompson Indians
of British Columbia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Memoir of the
American Museum of Natural History,
The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</hi>,
vol. i. part iv. (April 1900) p. 360.</note> In the Tyrol many people burn their hair
lest the witches should use it to raise thunderstorms; others
burn or bury it to prevent the birds from lining their nests
with it, which would cause the heads from which the hair
came to ache.<note place='foot'>I. V. Zingerle, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten, Bräuche
und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Innsbruck, 1871), p. 28, §§ 177, 179,
180.</note> Cut and combed-out hair is burned in
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
Pomerania and sometimes in Belgium.<note place='foot'>U. Jahn, <hi rend='italic'>Hexenwesen und Zauberei
in Pommern</hi> (Breslau, 1886), p.
15; <hi rend='italic'>Mélusine</hi>, 1878, col. 79; E. Monseur,
<hi rend='italic'>Le Folklore Wallon</hi>, p. 91.</note> In Norway the
parings of nails are either burned or buried, lest the elves
or the Finns should find them and make them into bullets
wherewith to shoot the cattle.<note place='foot'>E. H. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Indogermanische
Mythen</hi>, ii. <hi rend='italic'>Achilleis</hi> (Berlin, 1877), p.
523.</note> In Corea all the clippings
and combings of the hair of a whole family are carefully
preserved throughout the year and then burned in potsherds
outside the house on the evening of New Year's Day. At
such seasons the streets of Seoul, the capital, present a weird
spectacle. They are for the most part silent and deserted,
sometimes muffled deep in snow; but through the dusk of
twilight red lights glimmer at every door, where little groups
are busy tending tiny fires whose flickering flames cast a
ruddy fitful glow on the moving figures. The burning of
the hair in these fires is thought to exclude demons from
the house for a year; but coupled with this belief may well
be, or once have been, a wish to put these relics out of the
reach of witches and wizards.<note place='foot'>P. Lowell, <hi rend='italic'>Chosön, the Land of
the Morning Calm, a Sketch of Korea</hi>
(London, Preface dated 1885), pp. 199-201;
Mrs. Bishop, <hi rend='italic'>Korea and her
Neighbours</hi> (London, 1898), ii. 55 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Inconsistency
in
burning
cut hair
and nails.</note>
This destruction of the hair and nails plainly involves
an inconsistency of thought. The object of the destruction
is avowedly to prevent these severed portions of the body
from being used by sorcerers. But the possibility of their
being so used depends upon the supposed sympathetic connexion
between them and the man from whom they were
severed. And if this sympathetic connexion still exists,
clearly these severed portions cannot be destroyed without
injury to the man.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Hair is
sometimes
cut because
it is infected
with the
virus of
taboo.
In these
cases hair-cutting
is
a form of
purification. Hair of
mourners
cut to rid
them of the
pollution
of death.</note>
Before leaving this subject, on which I have perhaps
dwelt too long, it may be well to call attention to the motive
assigned for cutting a young child's hair in Rotti.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>.</note> In that
island the first hair is regarded as a danger to the child, and
its removal is intended to avert the danger. The reason of
this may be that as a young child is almost universally
supposed to be in a tabooed or dangerous state, it is necessary,
in removing the taboo, to remove also the separable
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
parts of the child's body because they are infected, so to
say, by the virus of taboo and as such are dangerous. The
cutting of the child's hair would thus be exactly parallel
to the destruction of the vessels which have been used by a
tabooed person.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>.</note> This view is borne out by a practice,
observed by some Australians, of burning off part of a
woman's hair after childbirth as well as burning every vessel
which has been used by her during her seclusion.<note place='foot'>W. Ridley, <q>Report on Australian
Languages and Traditions,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Anthropological Institute</hi>, ii.
(1873) p. 268.</note> Here
the burning of the woman's hair seems plainly intended to
serve the same purpose as the burning of the vessels used by
her; and as the vessels are burned because they are believed
to be tainted with a dangerous infection, so, we must suppose,
is also the hair. Similarly among the Latuka of central
Africa, a woman is secluded for fourteen days after the
birth of her child, and at the end of her seclusion her hair is
shaved off and burnt.<note place='foot'>Fr. Stuhlmann, <hi rend='italic'>Mit Emin Pascha
ins Herz von Afrika</hi>, p. 795.</note> Again, we have seen that girls at
puberty are strongly infected with taboo; hence it is not
surprising to find that the Ticunas of Brazil tear out all the
hair of girls at that period.<note place='foot'>F. de Castelnau, <hi rend='italic'>Expédition dans
les parties centrales de l'Amérique du
Sud</hi>, v. (Paris, 1851) p. 46.</note> Once more, the father of twins
in Uganda is tabooed for some time after the birth of the
children, and during that time he may not dress his hair nor
cut his finger nails. This state of taboo lasts until the next
war breaks out. When the army is under orders to march,
the father of twins has the whole of his body shaved and his
nails cut. The shorn hair and the cut nails are then tied
up in a ball, which the man takes with him to the war,
together with the bark cloth he wore at the ceremonial
dances after the birth of the twins. When he has killed a
foe, he crams the ball into the dead man's mouth, ties the
bark cloth round the neck of the corpse, and leaves them there
on the battlefield.<note place='foot'>J. Roscoe, <q>Further Notes on the
Manners and Customs of the Baganda,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxii. (1902) p. 34.</note> The ceremony appears to be intended
to rid the man of the taint of taboo which may be supposed
to adhere to his hair, nails, and the garment he wore.
Hence we can understand the importance attached by many
<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>
peoples to the first cutting of a child's hair and the elaborate
ceremonies by which the operation is accompanied.<note place='foot'>See G. A. Wilken, <hi rend='italic'>Über das
Haaropfer und einige andere Trauergebräuche
bei den Völkern Indonesiens</hi>,
pp. 94 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> (reprinted from the <hi rend='italic'>Revue
Coloniale Internationale</hi>, Amsterdam,
1886-87); H. Ploss, <hi rend='italic'>Das Kind in
Brauch und Sitte der Völker</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. 289
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; K. Potkanski, <q>Die Ceremonie
der Haarschur bei den Slaven und
Germanen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Anzeiger der Akademie
der Wissenschaften in Krakau</hi>, May
1896, pp. 232-251.</note> Again,
we can understand why a man should poll his head
after a journey.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>.</note> For we have seen that a traveller is
often believed to contract a dangerous infection from
strangers, and that, therefore, on his return home he is
obliged to submit to various purificatory ceremonies before
he is allowed to mingle freely with his own people.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> On
my hypothesis the polling of the hair is simply one of
these purificatory or disinfectant ceremonies. Certainly
this explanation applies to the custom as practised by the
Bechuanas, for we are expressly told that <q>they cleanse or
purify themselves after journeys by shaving their heads, etc.,
lest they should have contracted from strangers some evil
by witchcraft or sorcery.</q><note place='foot'>J. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in South
Africa, Second Journey</hi> (London, 1822),
ii. 205.</note> The cutting of the hair after a
vow may have the same meaning. It is a way of ridding
the man of what has been infected by the dangerous state,
whether we call it taboo, sanctity, or uncleanness (for all
these are only different expressions for the same primitive
conception), under which he laboured during the continuance
of the vow. Still more clearly does the meaning of the
practice come out in the case of mourners, who cut their
hair and nails and use new vessels when the period of their
mourning is at an end. This was done in ancient India,
obviously for the purpose of purifying such persons from the
dangerous influence of death and the ghost to which for a
time they had been exposed.<note place='foot'>H. Oldenberg, <hi rend='italic'>Die Religion des
Veda</hi>, pp. 426 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among the Bodos and
Dhimals of Assam, when a death has occurred, the family of
the deceased is reckoned unclean for three days. At the end
of that time they bathe, shave, and are sprinkled with holy
water, after which they hold the funeral feast.<note place='foot'>L. F. Alfred Maury, <q>Les Populations
primitives du nord de l'Hindoustan,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</hi>
(Paris), IVme Série, vii.
(1854) p. 197.</note> Here the act
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
of shaving must clearly be regarded as a purificatory rite, like
the bathing and sprinkling with holy water. At Hierapolis
no man might enter the great temple of Astarte on the same
day on which he had seen a corpse; next day he might
enter, provided he had first purified himself. But the kinsmen
of the deceased were not allowed to set foot in the sanctuary
for thirty days after the death, and before doing so they had
to shave their heads.<note place='foot'>Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>De dea Syria</hi>, 53.</note> At Agweh, on the Slave Coast of
West Africa, widows and widowers at the end of their
period of mourning wash themselves, shave their heads, pare
their nails, and put on new cloths; and the old cloths,
the shorn hair, and the nail-parings are all burnt.<note place='foot'>A. B. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>The Ewe-speaking
Peoples of the Slave Coast</hi>, p. 160.</note> The
Kayans of Borneo are not allowed to cut their hair or shave
their temples during the period of mourning; but as soon
as the mourning is ended by the ceremony of bringing home
a newly severed human head, the barber's knife is kept busy
enough. As each man leaves the barber's hands, he gathers
up the shorn locks and spitting on them murmurs a prayer
to the evil spirits not to harm him. He then blows the
hair out of the verandah of the house.<note place='foot'>W. H. Furness, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore in Borneo</hi>
(Wallingford, Pennsylvania, 1899;
privately printed), p. 28.</note> Among the
Wajagga of East Africa mourners shear their hair under a
fruit-bearing banana-tree and lay their shorn locks at the
foot of the tree. When the fruit of the tree is ripe, they
brew beer with it and invite all the mourners to partake of
it, saying, <q>Come and drink the beer of those hair-bananas.</q><note place='foot'>B. Gutmann, <q>Trauer und Begräbnissitten
der Wadschagga,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>,
lxxxix. (1906) p. 198.</note>
The tribes of British Central Africa destroy the house in
which a man has died, and on the day when this is done the
mourners have their heads shaved and bury the shorn hair on
the site of the house; the Atonga burn it in a new fire made
by the rubbing of two sticks.<note place='foot'>Miss A. Werner, <hi rend='italic'>The Natives of
British Central Africa</hi> (London, 1906),
pp. 165, 166, 167.</note> When an Akikuyu woman has,
in accordance with custom, exposed her misshapen or prematurely
born infant in the wood for the hyaenas to devour,
she is shaved on her return by an old woman and given a
magic potion to drink; after which she is regarded as clean.<note place='foot'>J. M. Hildebrandt, <q>Ethnographische
Notizen über Wakamba und
ihre Nachbarn,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</hi>,
x. (1878) p. 395. Children who
are born in an unusual position, the
second born of twins, and children
whose upper teeth appear before the
lower, are similarly exposed by the
Akikuyu. The mother is regarded as
unclean, not so much because she has
exposed, as because she has given
birth to such a child.</note>
<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>
Similarly at some Hindoo places of pilgrimage on the
banks of rivers men who have committed great crimes or
are troubled by uneasy consciences have every hair shaved
off by professional barbers before they plunge into the sacred
stream, from which <q>they emerge new creatures, with all the
accumulated guilt of a long life effaced.</q><note place='foot'>Monier Williams, <hi rend='italic'>Religious
Thought and Life in India</hi>, p. 375.</note> The matricide
Orestes is said to have polled his hair after appeasing the
angry Furies of his murdered mother.<note place='foot'>Strabo, xii. 2. 3, p. 535; Pausanias,
viii. 34. 3. In two paintings on Greek
vases we see Apollo in his character
of the purifier preparing to cut
off the hair of Orestes. See <hi rend='italic'>Monumenti
inediti</hi>, 1847, pl. 48; <hi rend='italic'>Annali
dell' Instituto di Corrispondenza
Archeologica</hi>, 1847, pl. x.; <hi rend='italic'>Archaeologische
Zeitung</hi>, 1860, pll. cxxxvii.
cxxxviii.; L. Stephani, in <hi rend='italic'>Compte
rendu de la Commission archéologique</hi>
(St. Petersburg), 1863, pp.
271 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='9. Spittle tabooed.'/>
<head>§ 9. Spittle tabooed.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>People
may be
bewitched
by means
of their
spittle. Hence
people take
care of
their spittle
to prevent
it from
falling
into the
hands of
sorcerers.</note>
The same fear of witchcraft which has led so many
people to hide or destroy their loose hair and nails has
induced other or the same people to treat their spittle in a
like fashion. For on the principles of sympathetic magic
the spittle is part of the man, and whatever is done to it will
have a corresponding effect on him. A Chilote Indian, who
has gathered up the spittle of an enemy, will put it in a
potato, and hang the potato in the smoke, uttering certain
spells as he does so in the belief that his foe will waste away
as the potato dries in the smoke. Or he will put the spittle
in a frog and throw the animal into an inaccessible, unnavigable
river, which will make the victim quake and shake
with ague.<note place='foot'>C. Martin, <q>Über die Eingeborenen
von Chiloe,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für
Ethnologie</hi>, ix. (1877) pp. 177 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When a Cherokee sorcerer desires to destroy a
man, he gathers up his victim's spittle on a stick and puts
it in a joint of wild parsnip, together with seven earthworms
beaten to a paste and several splinters from a tree which has
been struck by lightning. He then goes into the forest,
digs a hole at the foot of a tree which has been struck by
lightning, and deposits in the hole the joint of wild parsnip
<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>
with its contents. Further, he lays seven yellow stones
in the hole, then fills in the earth, and makes a fire over the
spot to destroy all traces of his work. If the ceremony has
been properly carried out, the man whose spittle has thus
been treated begins to feel ill at once; his soul shrivels up
and dwindles; and within seven days he is a dead man.<note place='foot'>J. Mooney, <q>Sacred Formulas of
the Cherokees,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Seventh Annual Report
of the Bureau of Ethnology</hi>
(Washington, 1891), pp. 392 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
In the East Indian island of Siaoo or Siauw, one of the
Sangi group, there are witches who by means of hellish
charms compounded from the roots of plants can change
their shape and bring sickness and misfortune on other folk.
These hags also crawl under the houses, which are raised
above the ground on posts, and there gathering up the spittle
of the inmates cause them to fall ill.<note place='foot'>B. C. A. J. van Dinter, <q>Eenige
geographische en ethnographische
aanteekeningen betreffende het eiland
Siaoe,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-
Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>, xii. (1899) p.
381.</note> If a Wotjobaluk
sorcerer cannot get the hair of his foe, a shred of his
rug, or something else that belongs to the man, he will
watch till he sees him spit, when he will carefully pick up
the spittle with a stick and use it for the destruction of
the careless spitter.<note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <q>On Australian
Medicine-men,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xvi. (1887) p. 27;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South-east Australia</hi>,
p. 365.</note> The natives of Urewera, a district in
the north island of New Zealand, enjoyed a high reputation
for their skill in magic. It was said that they made use of
people's spittle to bewitch them. Hence visitors were careful
to conceal their spittle, lest they should furnish these wizards
with a handle for working them harm.<note place='foot'>E. Dieffenbach, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in New
Zealand</hi> (London, 1843), ii. 59.</note> Similarly among some
tribes of South Africa no man will spit when an enemy is
near, lest his foe should find the spittle and give it to a wizard,
who would then mix it with magical ingredients so as to injure
the person from whom it fell. Even in a man's own house
his saliva is carefully swept away and obliterated for a similar
reason.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Macdonald, <hi rend='italic'>Light in Africa</hi>,
p. 209; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xx. (1891) p. 131.</note> For a like reason, no doubt, the natives of the
Marianne Islands use great precautions in spitting and
take care never to expectorate near somebody else's house.<note place='foot'>C. le Gobin, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire des Isles
Marianes</hi> (Paris, 1700), p. 52. The
writer confesses his ignorance of the
reason of the custom.</note>
<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>
Negroes of Senegal, the Bissagos Archipelago, and some
of the West Indian Islands, such as Guadeloupe and
Martinique, are also careful to efface their spittle by pressing
it into the ground with their feet, lest a sorcerer should
use it to their hurt.<note place='foot'>C. de Mensignac, <hi rend='italic'>Recherches
ethnographiques sur la salive et le
crachat</hi> (Bordeaux, 1892), pp. 48
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Natives of Astrolabe Bay, in German
New Guinea, wipe out their spittle for the same reason;<note place='foot'>Vahness, reported by F. von
Luschan, in <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen der Berliner
Gesellschaft für Anthropologie, Ethnologie
und Urgeschichte</hi>, 1900, p.
(416).</note> and a
like dread of sorcery prevents some natives of German New
Guinea from spitting on the ground in presence of others.<note place='foot'>K. Vetter, <hi rend='italic'>Komm herüber und
hilf uns!</hi> iii. (Barmen, 1898) pp.
9 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
The Telugus say that if a man, rinsing his teeth with charcoal
in the mornings, spits on the road and somebody else
treads on his spittle, the spitter will be laid up with a sharp
attack of fever for two or three days. Hence all who wish
to avoid the ailment should at once efface their spittle by
sprinkling water on it.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>, xxviii. (1899)
pp. 83 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Precautions
taken
by chiefs,
kings, and wizards
to guard
their spittle
from being
put to evil
uses by
magicians.</note>
If common folk are thus cautious, it is natural that
kings and chiefs should be doubly so. In the Sandwich
Islands chiefs were attended by a confidential servant
bearing a portable spittoon, and the deposit was carefully
buried every morning to put it out of the reach of
sorcerers.<note place='foot'>W. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>Polynesian Researches</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
i. 365.</note> On the Slave Coast of Africa, for the same
reason, whenever a king or chief expectorates, the saliva is
scrupulously gathered up and hidden or buried.<note place='foot'>A. B. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>The Ewe-speaking
Peoples of the Slave Coast</hi>, p. 99.</note> The same
precautions are taken for the same reason with the spittle
of the chief of Tabali in Southern Nigeria.<note place='foot'>C. Partridge, <hi rend='italic'>Cross River Natives</hi>
(London, 1905), p. 8.</note> At Bulebane,
in Senegambia, a French traveller observed a captive
engaged, with an air of great importance, in covering over
with sand all the spittle that fell from the lips of a native
dignitary; the man used a small stick for the purpose.<note place='foot'>A. Raffenel, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage dans l'Afrique
occidentale</hi> (Paris, 1846), p. 338.</note>
Page-boys, who carry tails of elephants, hasten to sweep up
or cover with sand the spittle of the king of Ashantee;<note place='foot'>C. de Mensignac, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p.
48.</note>
an attendant used to perform a similar service for the king
<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>
of Congo;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Mission Evangelica al reyno de
Congo por la serafica religion de los
Capuchinos</hi> (Madrid, 1649), p. 70
verso.</note> and a custom of the same sort prevails or used
to prevail at the court of the Muata Jamwo in the interior
of Angola.<note place='foot'>R. Andree, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographische Parallelen
und Vergleiche</hi>, Neue Folge
(Leipsic, 1889), p. 13.</note> In Yap, one of the Caroline Islands, there are
two great wizards, the head of all the magicians, whose
exalted dignity compels them to lead a very strict life.
They may eat fruit only from plants or trees which are
grown specially for them. When one of them goes abroad
the other must stay at home, for if they were to meet each
other on the road, some direful calamity would surely follow.
Though they may not smoke tobacco, they are allowed to
chew a quid of betel; but that which they expectorate is
carefully gathered up, carried away, and burned in a special
manner, lest any evil-disposed person should get possession
of the spittle and do their reverences a mischief by uttering
a curse over it.<note place='foot'>F. W. Christian, <hi rend='italic'>The Caroline
Islands</hi> (London, 1899), pp. 289
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among the Guaycurus and Payaguas of
Brazil, when a chief spat, the persons about him received his
saliva on their hands,<note place='foot'>R. Southey, <hi rend='italic'>History of Brazil</hi>, i.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(London, 1822) pp. 127, 138.</note> probably in order to prevent it from
being misused by magicians.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Use of
spittle in
making a
covenant.</note>
The magical use to which spittle may be put marks it
out, like blood or nail-parings, as a suitable material basis
for a covenant, since by exchanging their saliva the
covenanting parties give each other a guarantee of good
faith. If either of them afterwards forswears himself, the
other can punish his perfidy by a magical treatment of the
perjurer's spittle which he has in his custody. Thus when
the Wajagga of East Africa desire to make a covenant,
the two parties will sometimes sit down with a bowl of
milk or beer between them, and after uttering an incantation
over the beverage they each take a mouthful of the milk or
beer and spit it into the other's mouth. In urgent cases,
when there is no time to stand on ceremony, the two will
simply spit into each other's mouth, which seals the covenant
just as well.<note place='foot'>J. Raum, <q>Blut und Speichelbünde
bei den Wadschagga,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Archiv
für Religionswissenschaft</hi>, x. (1907)
pp. 290 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='10. Foods tabooed.'/>
<head>§ 10. Foods tabooed.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Certain
foods are
tabooed to
sacred
persons,
such as
kings, chiefs,
priests, and other sacred persons.</note>
As might have been expected, the superstitions of the
savage cluster thick about the subject of food; and he
abstains from eating many animals and plants, wholesome
enough in themselves, which for one reason or another
he fancies would prove dangerous or fatal to the eater.
Examples of such abstinence are too familiar and far too
numerous to quote. But if the ordinary man is thus deterred
by superstitious fear from partaking of various foods, the
restraints of this kind which are laid upon sacred or tabooed
persons, such as kings and priests, are still more numerous
and stringent. We have already seen that the Flamen
Dialis was forbidden to eat or even name several plants
and animals, and that the flesh diet of Egyptian kings was
restricted to veal and goose.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In antiquity many priests
and many kings of barbarous peoples abstained wholly
from a flesh diet.<note place='foot'>Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>De abstinentia</hi>, iii. 18.</note> The <foreign rend='italic'>Gangas</foreign> or fetish priests of the
Loango Coast are forbidden to eat or even see a variety
of animals and fish, in consequence of which their
flesh diet is extremely limited; often they live only on
herbs and roots, though they may drink fresh blood.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsche Expedition
an der Loango-Küste</hi>, ii. 170. The
blood may perhaps be drunk by them
as a medium of inspiration. See
<hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution of
Kings</hi>, vol. i. pp. 381 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The
heir to the throne of Loango is forbidden from infancy to
eat pork; from early childhood he is interdicted the use of
the <foreign rend='italic'>cola</foreign> fruit in company; at puberty he is taught by a
priest not to partake of fowls except such as he has himself
killed and cooked; and so the number of taboos goes on
increasing with his years.<note place='foot'>O. Dapper, <hi rend='italic'>Description de l'Afrique</hi>,
p. 336.</note> In Fernando Po the king after
installation is forbidden to eat <foreign rend='italic'>cocco</foreign> (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>arum acaule</foreign>), deer, and
porcupine, which are the ordinary foods of the people.<note place='foot'>T. J. Hutchinson, <hi rend='italic'>Impressions of
Western Africa</hi> (London, 1858), p. 198.</note>
The head chief of the Masai may eat nothing but milk,
honey, and the roasted livers of goats; for if he partook of
any other food he would lose his power of soothsaying and
of compounding charms.<note place='foot'>M. Merker, <hi rend='italic'>Die Masai</hi> (Berlin,
1904), p. 21.</note> The diet of the king of Unyoro
<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>
in Central Africa was strictly regulated by immemorial
custom. He might never eat vegetables, but must live on
milk and beef. Mutton he might not touch. The beef he
ate must be that of young animals not more than one year
old, and it must be spitted and roasted before a wood fire.
But he might not drink milk and eat beef at the same meal.
He drank milk thrice a day in the dairy, and the milk
was always drawn from a sacred herd which was kept for
his exclusive use. Nine cows, neither more nor less, were
daily brought from pasture to the royal enclosure to be
milked for the king. The herding and the milking of the
sacred animals were performed according to certain rules
prescribed by ancient custom.<note place='foot'>J. G. Frazer, <hi rend='italic'>Totemism and
Exogamy</hi>, ii. 526 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, from information
furnished by the Rev. J. Roscoe.</note> Amongst the Murrams of
Manipur (a district of eastern India, on the border of Burma)
<q>there are many prohibitions in regard to the food, both animal
and vegetable, which the chief should eat, and the Murrams
say the chief's post must be a very uncomfortable one.</q><note place='foot'>G. Watt (quoting Col. W. J.
M'Culloch), <q>The Aboriginal Tribes
of Manipur,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xvi. (1887) p. 360.</note>
Among the hill tribes of Manipur the scale of diet allowed
by custom to the <foreign rend='italic'>ghennabura</foreign> or religious head of a village
is always extremely limited. The savoury dog, the tomato,
the <foreign rend='italic'>murghi</foreign>, are forbidden to him. If a man in one of
these tribes is wealthy enough to feast his whole village and
to erect a memorial stone, he is entitled to become subject
to the same self-denying ordinances as the <foreign rend='italic'>ghennabura</foreign>. He
wears the same special clothes, and for the space of a year
at least he may not use a drinking horn, but must drink
from a bamboo cup.<note place='foot'>T. C. Hodson, <q>The Native Tribes
of Manipur,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxxi. (1901) p. 306.</note> Among the Karennis or Red Karens
of Burma a chief attains his position not by hereditary right
but in virtue of the observance of taboo. He must abstain
from rice and liquor. His mother too must have eschewed
these things and lived only on yams and potatoes while she
was with child. During that time she might neither eat
meat nor drink water from a common well; and in order to
be duly qualified for a chiefship her son must continue these
habits.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>, xxi. (1892)
pp. 317 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; (Sir) J. G. Scott and J. P.
Hardiman, <hi rend='italic'>Gazetteer of Upper Burma
and the Shan States</hi>, part ii. vol. i.
p. 308.</note> Among the Pshaws and Chewsurs of the Caucasus,
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
whose nominal Christianity has degenerated into superstition
and polytheism, there is an annual office which entails a
number of taboos on the holder or <foreign rend='italic'>dasturi</foreign>, as he is called.
He must live the whole year in the temple, without going to
his house or visiting his wife; indeed he may not speak to
any one, except the priests, for fear of defiling himself. Once
a week he must bathe in the river, whatever the weather
may be, using for the purpose a ladder on which no one else
may set foot. His only nourishment is bread and water.
In the temple he superintends the brewing of the beer for
the festivals.<note place='foot'><q>Die Pschawen und Chewsuren
im Kaukasus,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für allgemeine
Erdkunde</hi>, ii. (1857) p. 76.</note> In the village of Tomil, in Yap, one of the
Caroline Islands, the year consists of twenty-four months,
and there are five men who for a hundred days of the year
may eat only fish and taro, may not chew betel, and must
observe strict continence. The reason assigned by them for
submitting to these restraints is that if they did not act thus
the immature girls would attain to puberty too soon.<note place='foot'>A. Senfft, <q>Ethnographische Beiträge
über die Karolineninsel Yap,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Petermanns Mitteilungen</hi>, xlix. (1903)
p. 54. In Gall, another village of
the same island, the people grow
bananas for sale, but will not eat them
themselves, fearing that if they did so
the women of the village would be
barren (<hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>).</note>
</p>

<p>
To explain the ultimate reason why any particular food
is prohibited to a whole tribe or to certain of its members
would commonly require a far more intimate knowledge of
the history and beliefs of the tribe than we possess. The
general motive of such prohibitions is doubtless the same
which underlies the whole taboo system, namely, the
conservation of the tribe and the individual.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='11. Knots and Rings tabooed.'/>
<head>§ 11. Knots and Rings tabooed.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Knots and
rings not
worn by
certain
sacred
persons. Knots
loosed and
locks unlocked
at
childbirth
to facilitate
delivery.</note>
We have seen that among the many taboos which the
Flamen Dialis at Rome had to observe, there was one that
forbade him to have a knot on any part of his garments,
and another that obliged him to wear no ring unless it were
broken.<note place='foot'>Aulus Gellius, x. 15. 6 and 9. See
above, p. 13.</note> In like manner Moslem pilgrims to Mecca are in
a state of sanctity or taboo and may wear on their persons
<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>
neither knots nor rings.<note place='foot'>E. Doutté, <hi rend='italic'>Magie et religion dans
l'Afrique du Nord</hi>, pp. 87 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> These rules are probably of kindred
significance, and may conveniently be considered together.
To begin with knots, many people in different parts of the
world entertain a strong objection to having any knot about
their person at certain critical seasons, particularly childbirth,
marriage, and death. Thus among the Saxons of Transylvania,
when a woman is in travail all knots on her garments
are untied, because it is believed that this will facilitate her
delivery, and with the same intention all the locks in the
house, whether on doors or boxes, are unlocked.<note place='foot'>J. Hillner, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümlicher Brauch
und Glaube bei Geburt und Taufe im
Siebenbürger Sachsenlande</hi>, p. 15. This
tractate (of which I possess a copy)
appears to be a programme of the High
School (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Gymnasium</foreign>) at Schässburg in
Transylvania for the school year 1876-1877.</note> The
Lapps think that a lying-in woman should have no knot on
her garments, because a knot would have the effect of
making the delivery difficult and painful.<note place='foot'>C. Leemius, <hi rend='italic'>De Lapponibus Finmarchiac
eorumque lingua, vita, et
religione pristina commentatio</hi> (Copenhagen,
1767), p. 494.</note> In ancient India
it was a rule to untie all knots in a house at the moment of
childbirth.<note place='foot'>W. Caland, <hi rend='italic'>Altindisches Zauberritual</hi>
(Amsterdam, 1900), p. 108.</note> Roman religion required that women who took
part in the rites of Juno Lucina, the goddess of childbirth,
should have no knot tied on their persons.<note place='foot'>Servius on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> iii. 518.</note> In the East
Indies this superstition is extended to the whole time of
pregnancy; the people believe that if a pregnant woman
were to tie knots, or braid, or make anything fast, the child
would thereby be constricted or the woman would herself be
<q>tied up</q> when her time came.<note place='foot'>J. Kreemer, <q>Hoe de Javaan zijne
zieken verzorgt,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van
wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xxxvi. (1892) p. 114;
C. M. Pleyte, <q>Plechtigheden en
gebruiken uit den cyclus van het
familienleven der volken van den Indischen
Archipel,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van
Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>, xli. (1892) p. 586.</note> Nay, some of them enforce
the observance of the rule on the father as well as the mother
of the unborn child. Among the Sea Dyaks neither of the
parents may bind up anything with string or make anything
fast during the wife's pregnancy.<note place='foot'>H. Ling Roth, <hi rend='italic'>The Natives of
Sarawak and British North Borneo</hi>,
i. 98.</note> Among the Land Dyaks
the husband of the expectant mother is bound to refrain from
tying things together with rattans until after her delivery.<note place='foot'>Spenser St. John, <hi rend='italic'>Life in the
Forests of the Far East</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. 170.</note>
<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>
In the Toumbuluh tribe of North Celebes a ceremony
is performed in the fourth or fifth month of a woman's
pregnancy, and after it her husband is forbidden, among
many other things, to tie any fast knots and to sit with
his legs crossed over each other.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <q>Alte Gebräuche
bei Heirathen, Geburt und Sterbefällen
bei dem Toumbuluh-Stamm in der
Minahasa (Nord Selebes),</q> <hi rend='italic'>Internationales
Archiv für Ethnographie</hi>, viii.
(1895) pp. 95 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the Kaitish tribe
of central Australia the father of a newborn child goes out
into the scrub for three days, away from his camp, leaving
his girdle and arm-bands behind him, so that he has nothing
tied tightly round any part of his body. This freedom from
constriction is supposed to benefit his wife.<note place='foot'>Spencer and Gillen, <hi rend='italic'>Northern
Tribes of Central Australia</hi>, pp. 606 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>On the
principles
of homoeopathic
magic
knots are
impediments
which tie
up the
mother and
prevent
her from
bringing
the child to
the birth. All locks,
doors,
drawers,
windows,
etc. opened
in order to
facilitate
childbirth.</note>
In all these cases the idea seems to be that the tying of
a knot would, as they say in the East Indies, <q>tie up</q> the
woman, in other words, impede and perhaps prevent her
delivery, or delay her convalescence after the birth. On the
principles of homoeopathic or imitative magic the physical
obstacle or impediment of a knot on a cord would
create a corresponding obstacle or impediment in the
body of the woman. That this is really the explanation
of the rule appears from a custom observed by the
Hos of Togoland in West Africa at a difficult birth.
When a woman is in hard labour and cannot bring forth,
they call in a magician to her aid. He looks at her and
says, <q>The child is bound in the womb, that is why she
cannot be delivered.</q> On the entreaties of her female
relations he then promises to loose the bond so that she
may bring forth. For that purpose he orders them to
fetch a tough creeper from the forest, and with it he binds
the hands and feet of the sufferer on her back. Then
he takes a knife and calls out the woman's name, and
when she answers he cuts through the creeper with a
knife, saying, <q>I cut through to-day thy bonds and thy
child's bonds.</q> After that he chops up the creeper small,
puts the bits in a vessel of water, and bathes the woman
with the water.<note place='foot'>J. Spieth, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ewe-Stämme</hi>, p.
692.</note> Here the cutting of the creeper with
which the woman's hands and feet are bound is a simple
piece of homoeopathic or imitative magic: by releasing her
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
limbs from their bonds the magician imagines that he
simultaneously releases the child in her womb from the
trammels which impede its birth. For a similar reason, no
doubt, among the same people a priest ties up the limbs
of a pregnant woman with grass and then unties the knots,
saying, <q>I will now open you.</q> After that the woman has
to partake of some maize-porridge in which a ring made
of a magic cord had been previously placed by the priest.<note place='foot'>J. Spieth, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ewe-Stämme</hi>, pp.
433 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
The intention of this ceremony is probably, on the principles
of homoeopathic magic, to ensure for the woman an easy
delivery by releasing her from the bonds of grass. The
same train of thought underlies a practice observed by
some peoples of opening all locks, doors, and so on,
while a birth is taking place in the house. We have
seen that at such a time the Germans of Transylvania
open all the locks, and the same thing is done also in
Voigtland and Mecklenburg.<note place='foot'>J. A. E. Köhler, <hi rend='italic'>Volksbrauch,
Aberglauben, Sagen und andre alte
Überlieferungen im Voigtlande</hi>, pp.
435 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche
Volksaberglaube</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p. 355, § 574.</note> In north-western Argyllshire
superstitious people used to open every lock in
the house at childbirth.<note place='foot'>J. G. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Superstitions of
the Highlands and Islands of Scotland</hi>,
p. 37. note 1.</note> The old Roman custom of
presenting women with a key as a symbol of an easy
delivery<note place='foot'>Festus, p. 56, ed. C. O. Müller.</note> perhaps points to the observance of a similar
custom. In the island of Salsette near Bombay, when a
woman is in hard labour, all locks of doors or drawers are
opened with a key to facilitate her delivery.<note place='foot'>G. F. D'Penha, <q>Superstitions
and Customs in Salsette,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Indian
Antiquary</hi>, xxviii. (1899) p. 115.</note> Among the
Mandelings of Sumatra the lids of all chests, boxes, pans and
so forth are opened; and if this does not produce the desired
effect, the anxious husband has to strike the projecting ends
of some of the house-beams in order to loosen them; for
they think that <q>everything must be open and loose to
facilitate the delivery.</q><note place='foot'>H. Ris, <q>De onderafdeeling
Klein Mandailing Oeloe en Pahantan
en hare Bevolking,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van
Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>, xlvi. (1896) p.
503. Compare A. L. van Hasselt,
<hi rend='italic'>Volksbeschrijving van Midden Sumatra</hi>,
p. 266.</note> At a difficult birth the Battas
of Sumatra make a search through the possessions of
husband and wife and untie everything that is tied up in a
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
bundle.<note place='foot'>J. H. Meerwaldt, <q>Gebruiken
der Bataks in het maatschappelijk
leven,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege het
Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xlix. (1905) p. 117.</note> In some parts of Java, when a woman is in travail,
everything in the house that was shut is opened, in order
that the birth may not be impeded; not only are doors
opened and the lids of chests, boxes, rice-pots, and water-buts
lifted up, but even swords are unsheathed and spears
drawn out of their cases.<note place='foot'>H. K[ern], <q>Bijgeloof onder de
inlanders in den Oosthoek van Java,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land-
en Volkenkunde</hi>, xxvi. (1880) 310; J.
Kreemer, <q>Hoe de Javaan zijne zieken
verzorgt,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege het
Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xxxvi. (1892) pp. 120, 124; D.
Louwerier, <q>Bijgeloovige gebruiken,
die door de Javanen worden in acht
genomen bij de verzorging en opvoeding
hunner kinderen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xlix. (1905) p. 253.</note> Customs of the same sort
are practised with the same intention in other parts of
the East Indies.<note place='foot'>A. W. P. V. Pistorius, <hi rend='italic'>Studien
over de inlandsche huishouding in de
Padangsche Bovenlanden</hi> (Zalt-Bommel,
1871), pp. 55 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. L. van Hasselt,
<hi rend='italic'>Volksbeschrijving van Midden-Sumatra</hi>
(Leyden, 1882), p. 266; J. G. F.
Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik- en kroesharige rassen
tusschen Selebes en Papua</hi> (the Hague,
1886), pp. 135, 207, 325.</note> In Chittagong, when a woman cannot
bring her child to the birth, the midwife gives orders to
throw all doors and windows wide open, to uncork all bottles,
to remove the bungs from all casks, to unloose the cows in
the stall, the horses in the stable, the watchdog in his
kennel, to set free sheep, fowls, ducks, and so forth. This
universal liberty accorded to the animals and even to
inanimate things is, according to the people, an infallible
means of ensuring the woman's delivery and allowing the
babe to be born.<note place='foot'>Th. Bérengier, <q>Croyances superstitieuses
dans le pays de Chittagong,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Missions Catholiques</hi>, xiii. (1881) p.
515.</note> At the moment of childbirth the Chams
of Cochin-China hasten to open the stall of the buffaloes and
to unyoke the plough, doubtless with the intention of aiding
the woman in travail, though the writer who reports the
custom is unable to explain it.<note place='foot'>Damien Grangeon, <q>Les Chams
et leurs superstitions,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Missions Catholiques</hi>,
xxviii. (1896) p. 93.</note> Among the Singhalese, a
few hours before a birth is expected to take place, all the
cupboards in the house are unlocked with the express
purpose of facilitating the delivery.<note place='foot'>A. A. Perera, <q>Glimpses of Singhalese
Social Life,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>,
xxxi. (1902) p. 378.</note> In the island of
Saghalien, when a woman is in labour, her husband undoes
everything that can be undone. He loosens the plaits of his
<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>
hair and the laces of his shoes. Then he unties whatever is
tied in the house or its vicinity. In the courtyard he takes
the axe out of the log in which it is stuck; he unfastens
the boat, if it is moored to a tree, he withdraws the
cartridges from his gun, and the arrows from his crossbow.<note place='foot'>B. Pilsudski, <q>Schwangerschaft,
Entbindung und Fehlgeburt bei den
Bewohnern der Insel Sachalin,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Anthropos</hi>,
v. (1910) p. 759.</note>
In Bilaspore a woman's hair is never allowed to remain
knotted while she is in the act of giving birth to a child.<note place='foot'>E. M. Gordon, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Folk Tales</hi>
(London, 1908), p. 39.</note>
Among some modern Jews of Roumania it is customary for
the unmarried girls of a household to unbraid their hair and
let it hang loose on their shoulders while a woman is in hard
labour in the house.<note place='foot'>R. Campbell Thompson, <hi rend='italic'>Semitic
Magic</hi> (London, 1908), p. 169.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>On the
principles
of homoeopathic
magic the
crossing of
the legs
is also
thought to
impede
childbirth
and other
things.</note>
Again, we have seen that a Toumbuluh man abstains
not only from tying knots, but also from sitting with
crossed legs during his wife's pregnancy. The train of
thought is the same in both cases. Whether you cross
threads in tying a knot, or only cross your legs in sitting
at your ease, you are equally, on the principles of homoeopathic
magic, crossing or thwarting the free course of
things, and your action cannot but check and impede
whatever may be going forward in your neighbourhood.
Of this important truth the Romans were fully aware. To
sit beside a pregnant woman or a patient under medical
treatment with clasped hands, says the grave Pliny, is
to cast a malignant spell over the person, and it is worse
still if you nurse your leg or legs with your clasped hands,
or lay one leg over the other. Such postures were regarded
by the old Romans as a let and hindrance to business of
every sort, and at a council of war or a meeting of magistrates,
at prayers and sacrifices, no man was suffered to
cross his legs or clasp his hands.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xxviii. 59.
Compare Hippocrates, <hi rend='italic'>De morbo sacro</hi>,
μηδὲ πόδα ἐπὶ ποδὶ ἔχειν, μηδὲ χεῖρα ἐπὶ
χειρί; ταῦτα γὰρ πάντα κωλύματα εἶναι
(vol. i. p. 589, ed. Kühn, Leipsic,
1825, quoted by E. Rohde, <hi rend='italic'>Psyche</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
ii. 76 note <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>).</note> The stock instance of
the dreadful consequences that might flow from doing one
or the other was that of Alcmena, who travailed with
Hercules for seven days and seven nights, because the
goddess Lucina sat in front of the house with clasped hands
<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>
and crossed legs, and the child could not be born until the
goddess had been beguiled into changing her attitude.<note place='foot'>Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Metam.</hi> ix. 285 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Antoninus
Liberalis, quoting Nicander,
says it was the Fates and Ilithyia who
impeded the birth of Hercules, but
though he says they clasped their
hands, he does not say that they
crossed their legs (<hi rend='italic'>Transform.</hi> 29).
Compare Pausanias, ix. 11. 3.</note> It
is a Bulgarian superstition that if a pregnant woman is in
the habit of sitting with crossed legs, she will suffer much
in childbed.<note place='foot'>A. Strausz, <hi rend='italic'>Die Bulgaren</hi> (Leipsic,
1898), p. 293.</note> In some parts of Bavaria, when conversation
comes to a standstill and silence ensues, they say, <q>Surely
somebody has crossed his legs.</q><note place='foot'>F. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi>, ii. 303.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Knots are
supposed
to prevent
the consummation
of
marriage. Knots
loosed
in the
costume
of bride
and bridegroom
in
order to
ensure the
consummation
of the
marriage.
Knots
tied by
enchanters
to render
the bridegroom
impotent.</note>
The magical effect of knots in trammelling and obstructing
human activity was believed to be manifested at
marriage not less than at birth. During the Middle Ages,
and down to the eighteenth century, it seems to have been
commonly held in Europe that the consummation of
marriage could be prevented by any one who, while the
wedding ceremony was taking place, either locked a lock or
tied a knot in a cord, and then threw the lock or the cord
away. The lock or the knotted cord had to be flung into
water; and until it had been found and unlocked, or untied,
no real union of the married pair was possible.<note place='foot'>J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
ii. 897, 983; J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>,
iii. 299; J. G. Dalyell, <hi rend='italic'>Darker
Superstitions of Scotland</hi>, pp. 302,
306 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; B. Souché, <hi rend='italic'>Croyances, présages
et traditions diverses</hi>, p. 16;
J. G. Bourke, in <hi rend='italic'>Ninth Annual Report
of the Bureau of Ethnology</hi> (Washington,
1892), p. 567.</note> Hence it
was a grave offence, not only to cast such a spell, but also
to steal or make away with the material instrument of it,
whether lock or knotted cord. In the year 1718 the parliament
of Bordeaux sentenced some one to be burned alive
for having spread desolation through a whole family by means
of knotted cords; and in 1705 two persons were condemned
to death in Scotland for stealing certain charmed knots which
a woman had made, in order thereby to mar the wedded
happiness of Spalding of Ashintilly.<note place='foot'>J. G. Dalyell, <hi rend='italic'>ll.cc.</hi></note> The belief in the efficacy
of these charms appears to have lingered in the Highlands
of Perthshire down to the end of the eighteenth century, for
at that time it was still customary in the beautiful parish of
Logierait, between the river Tummel and the river Tay, to
unloose carefully every knot in the clothes of the bride and
<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>
bridegroom before the celebration of the marriage ceremony.
When the ceremony was over, and the bridal party had left
the church, the bridegroom immediately retired one way
with some young men to tie the knots that had been loosed
a little before; and the bride in like manner withdrew
somewhere else to adjust the disorder of her dress.<note place='foot'>Rev. Dr. Th. Bisset, in Sir John
Sinclair's <hi rend='italic'>Statistical Account of Scotland</hi>,
v. (Edinburgh, 1793) p. 83. In his account
of the second tour which he made
in Scotland in the summer of 1772, Pennant
says that <q>the precaution of loosening
every knot about the new-joined
pair is strictly observed</q> (Pinkerton's
<hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, iii. 382). He
is here speaking particularly of the
Perthshire Highlands.</note> In
some parts of the Highlands it was deemed enough that
the bridegroom's left shoe should be without buckle or
latchet, <q>to prevent witches from depriving him, on the
nuptial night, of the power of loosening the virgin zone.</q><note place='foot'>Pennant, <q>Tour in Scotland,</q>
Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, iii.
91. However, at a marriage in the
island of Skye, the same traveller observed
that <q>the bridegroom put all
the powers of magic to defiance, for
he was married with both shoes tied
with their latchet</q> (Pennant, <q>Second
Tour in Scotland,</q> Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages
and Travels</hi>, iii. 325). According to
another writer the shoe-tie of the bridegroom's
<emph>right</emph> foot was unloosed at the
church-door (Ch. Rogers, <hi rend='italic'>Social Life in
Scotland</hi>, iii. 232).</note>
We meet with the same superstition and the same custom
at the present day in Syria. The persons who help a
Syrian bridegroom to don his wedding garments take care
that no knot is tied on them and no button buttoned, for
they believe that a button buttoned or a knot tied would
put it within the power of his enemies to deprive him of his
nuptial rights by magical means.<note place='foot'>Eijüb Abela, <q>Beiträge zur
Kenntniss abergläubischer Gebräuche
in Syrien,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift des deutschen
Palaestina-Vereins</hi>, vii. (1884) pp.
91 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Lesbos the malignant
person who would thus injure a bridegroom on his wedding
day ties a thread to a bush, while he utters imprecations;
but the bridegroom can defeat the spell by wearing at
his girdle a piece of an old net or of an old mantilla
belonging to the bride in which knots have been tied.<note place='foot'>Georgeakis et Pineau, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore de
Lesbos</hi>, pp. 344 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
The fear of such charms is diffused all over North Africa
at the present day. To render a bridegroom impotent the
enchanter has only to tie a knot in a handkerchief which he
had previously placed quietly on some part of the bridegroom's
body when he was mounted on horseback ready to
fetch his bride: so long as the knot in the handkerchief
<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>
remains tied, so long will the bridegroom remain powerless
to consummate the marriage. Another way of effecting the
same object is to stand behind the bridegroom when he is on
horseback, with an open clasp-knife or pair of scissors in
your hand and to call out his name; if he imprudently
answers, you at once shut the clasp-knife or the pair of
scissors with a snap, and that makes him impotent. To
guard against this malignant spell the bridegroom's mother
will sometimes buy a penknife on the eve of the marriage,
shut it up, and then open it just at the moment when her
son is about to enter the bridal chamber.<note place='foot'>E. Doutté, <hi rend='italic'>Magie et religion dans
l'Afrique du Nord</hi>, pp. 288-292.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Use of
knots at
marriage
in the
island of
Rotti.</note>
A curious use is made of knots at marriage in the little East
Indian island of Rotti. When a man has paid the price of his
bride, a cord is fastened round her waist, if she is a maid, but
not otherwise. Nine knots are tied in the cord, and in order
to make them harder to unloose, they are smeared with wax.
Bride and bridegroom are then secluded in a chamber, where
he has to untie the knots with the thumb and forefinger of
his left hand only. It may be from one to twelve months
before he succeeds in undoing them all. Until he has done
so he may not look on the woman as his wife. In no case
may the cord be broken, or the bridegroom would render
himself liable to any fine that the bride's father might choose
to impose. When all the knots are loosed, the woman is
his wife, and he shews the cord to her father, and generally
presents his wife with a golden or silver necklace instead
of the cord.<note place='foot'><q>Eenige mededeelingen betreffende
Rote door een inlandischen
Schoolmeester,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>, xxvii.
(1882) p. 554; N. Graafland, <q>Eenige
aanteekeningen op ethnographisch
gebied ten aanzien van het eiland
Rote,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege het
Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xxxiii. (1889) pp. 373 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The meaning of this custom is not clear, but
we may conjecture that the nine knots refer to the nine
months of pregnancy, and that miscarriage would be the
supposed result of leaving a single knot untied.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Knots may
be used to
inflict
disease.</note>
The maleficent power of knots may also be manifested
in the infliction of sickness, disease, and all kinds of
misfortune. Thus among the Hos of Togoland a sorcerer
will sometimes curse his enemy and tie a knot in a stalk of
grass, saying, <q>I have tied up So-and-So in this knot.
<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>
May all evil light upon him! When he goes into the field,
may a snake sting him! When he goes to the chase, may
a ravening beast attack him! And when he steps into a
river, may the water sweep him away! When it rains, may
the lightning strike him! May evil nights be his!</q>
It is believed that in the knot the sorcerer has bound
up the life of his enemy.<note place='foot'>J. Spieth, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ewe-Stämme</hi>, p.
533.</note> Babylonian witches and wizards
of old used to strangle their victim, seal his mouth,
wrack his limbs, and tear his entrails by merely tying
knots in a cord, while at each knot they muttered a spell.
But happily the evil could be undone by simply undoing the
knots.<note place='foot'>M. Jastrow, <hi rend='italic'>The Religion of Babylonia
and Assyria</hi>, pp. 268, 270.</note> We hear of a man in one of the Orkney Islands
who was utterly ruined by nine knots cast on a blue thread;
and it would seem that sick people in Scotland sometimes
prayed to the devil to restore them to health by loosing the
secret knot that was doing all the mischief.<note place='foot'>J. G. Dalyell, <hi rend='italic'>Darker Superstitions
of Scotland</hi>, p. 307.</note> In the Koran
there is an allusion to the mischief of <q>those who puff into
the knots,</q> and an Arab commentator on the passage
explains that the words refer to women who practise magic
by tying knots in cords, and then blowing and spitting upon
them. He goes on to relate how, once upon a time, a wicked
Jew bewitched the prophet Mohammed himself by tying nine
knots on a string, which he then hid in a well. So the
prophet fell ill, and nobody knows what might have happened
if the archangel Gabriel had not opportunely revealed to the
holy man the place where the knotted cord was concealed.
The trusty Ali soon fetched the baleful thing from the well;
and the prophet recited over it certain charms, which were
specially revealed to him for the purpose. At every verse of
the charms a knot untied itself, and the prophet experienced
a certain relief.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Al Baidawī's Commentary on the
Koran</hi>, chap. 113, verse 4. I have to
thank my friend Prof. A. A. Bevan
for indicating this passage to me,
and furnishing me with a translation
of it.</note> It will hardly be disputed that by tying
knots on the string the pestilent Hebrew contrived, if I may
say so, to constrict or astringe or, in short, to tie up some
vital organ or organs in the prophet's stomach. At least
we are informed that something of this sort is done by
<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>
Australian blackfellows at the present day, and if so, why
should it not have been done by Arabs in the time of
Mohammed? The Australian mode of operation is as
follows. When a blackfellow wishes to settle old scores
with another blackfellow, he ties a rope of fibre or bark
so tightly round the neck of his slumbering friend as
partially to choke him. Having done this he takes out the
man's caul-fat from under his short rib, ties up his inside
carefully with string, replaces the skin, and having effaced
all external marks of the wound, makes off with the stolen
fat. The victim on awakening feels no inconvenience, but
sooner or later, sometimes months afterwards, while he is
hunting or exerting himself violently in some other way, he
will feel the string snap in his inside. <q>Hallo,</q> says he,
<q>somebody has tied me up inside with string!</q> and he goes
home to the camp and dies on the spot.<note place='foot'>E. Palmer, <q>Notes on some Australian
Tribes,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xiii. (1884) p. 293.
The Tahitians ascribed certain painful
illnesses to the twisting and knotting
of their insides by demons (W. Ellis,
<hi rend='italic'>Polynesian Researches</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. 363).</note> Who can doubt
but that in this lucid diagnosis we have the true key to the
prophet's malady, and that he too might have succumbed to
the wiles of his insidious foe if it had not been for the timely
intervention of the archangel Gabriel?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Knots may
be used
to cure
disease.</note>
If knots are supposed to kill, they are also supposed to
cure. This follows from the belief that to undo the knots
which are causing sickness will bring the sufferer relief. But
apart from this negative virtue of maleficent knots, there
are certain beneficent knots to which a positive power of
healing is ascribed. Pliny tells us that some folk cured
diseases of the groin by taking a thread from a web, tying
seven or nine knots on it, and then fastening it to the
patient's groin; but to make the cure effectual it was
necessary to name some widow as each knot was tied.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xxviii. 48.</note>
The ancient Assyrians seem to have made much use of
knotted cords as a remedy for ailments and disease. The
cord with its knots, which were sometimes twice seven in
number, was tied round the head, neck, or limbs of the
patient, and then after a time cut off and thrown away,
carrying with it, as was apparently supposed, the aches and
<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>
pains of the sufferer. Sometimes the magic cord which was
used for this beneficent purpose consisted of a double strand
of black and white wool; sometimes it was woven of the
hair of a virgin kid.<note place='foot'>C. Fossey, <hi rend='italic'>La Magie assyrienne</hi>
(Paris, 1902), pp. 83 sq.; R. Campbell
Thompson, <hi rend='italic'>Semitic Magic</hi> (London,
1908), pp. 164 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> A modern Arab cure for fever reported
from the ruins of Nineveh is to tie a cotton thread
with seven knots on it round the wrist of the patient, who
must wear it for seven or eight days or till such time as the
fever passes, after which he may throw it away.<note place='foot'>R. Campbell Thompson, <hi rend='italic'>Semitic
Magic</hi>, pp. 168 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> O'Donovan
describes a similar remedy for fever employed among the
Turcomans. The enchanter takes some camel hair and spins
it into a stout thread, droning a spell the while. Next he
ties seven knots on the thread, blowing on each knot before
he pulls it tight. This knotted thread is then worn as a
bracelet on his wrist by the patient. Every day one of the
knots is untied and blown upon, and when the seventh knot
is undone the whole thread is rolled up into a ball and
thrown into a river, bearing away (as they imagine) the
fever with it.<note place='foot'>E. O'Donovan, <hi rend='italic'>The Merv Oasis</hi>
(London, 1882), ii. 319.</note> The Hos of Togoland in like manner tie
strings round a sick man's neck, arms, or legs, according
to the nature of the malady; some of the strings are
intended to guard him against the influence of <q>the
evil mouth</q>; others are a protection against the ghosts
of the dead.<note place='foot'>J. Spieth, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ewe-Stämme</hi>, p.
531.</note> In Argyleshire, threads with three knots
on them are still used to cure the internal ailments
of man and beast. The witch rubs the sick person or
cow with the knotted thread, burns two of the knots in
the fire, saying, <q>I put the disease and the sickness on the
top of the fire,</q> and ties the rest of the thread with the single
knot round the neck of the person or the tail of the cow,
but always so that it may not be seen.<note place='foot'>R. C. Maclagan, M.D., <q>Notes
on Folklore Objects collected in Argyleshire,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, vi. (1895) pp. 154-156.
In the north-west of Ireland
divination by means of a knotted thread
is practised in order to discover whether
a sick beast will recover or die. See
E. B. Tylor, in <hi rend='italic'>International Folk-lore
Congress</hi>, 1891, <hi rend='italic'>Papers and Transactions</hi>,
pp. 391 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> A Scotch cure for a
sprained leg or arm is to cast nine knots in a black thread and
then tie the thread round the suffering limb, while you say:
</p>

<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>The Lord rade,</hi></q></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>And the foal slade;</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>He lighted</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>And he righted,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Set joint to joint,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Bone to bone,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>And sinew to sinew.</hi></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>Heal, in the Holy Ghost's name!</hi></q><note place='foot'>R. Chambers, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Rhymes of
Scotland</hi>, New Edition, p. 349. Grimm
has shewn that the words of this charm
are a very ancient spell for curing a
lame horse, a spell based on an incident
in the myth of the old Norse god
Balder, whose foal put its foot out of
joint and was healed by the great
master of spells, the god Woden. See
J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> i. 185,
ii. 1030 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Christ has been substituted
for Balder in the more modern forms
of the charm both in Scotland and
Germany.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
In Gujarat, if a man takes seven cotton threads, goes to
a place where an owl is hooting, strips naked, ties a knot
at each hoot, and fastens the knotted thread round the
right arm of a man sick of the fever, the malady will
leave him.<note place='foot'>W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion and
Folk-lore of Northern India</hi> (Westminster,
1896), i. 279.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Knots may
be used to
win a lover
or capture
a runaway
slave.</note>
Again, knots may be used by an enchantress to win a
lover and attach him firmly to herself. Thus the love-sick
maid in Virgil seeks to draw Daphnis to her from the city
by spells and by tying three knots on each of three strings
of different colours.<note place='foot'>Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Ecl.</hi> viii. 78-80. Highland
sorcerers also used three threads of
different colours with three knots tied
on each thread. See J. G. Dalyell,
<hi rend='italic'>Darker Superstitions of Scotland</hi>, p.
306.</note> So an Arab maiden, who had lost her
heart to a certain man, tried to gain his love and bind him
to herself by tying knots in his whip; but her jealous rival
undid the knots.<note place='foot'>J. Wellhausen, <hi rend='italic'>Reste arabischen
Heidentums</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Berlin, 1897), p. 163.</note> On the same principle magic knots may
be employed to stop a runaway. In Swazieland you may
often see grass tied in knots at the side of the footpaths.
Every one of these knots tells of a domestic tragedy. A
wife has run away from her husband, and he and his friends
have gone in pursuit, binding up the paths, as they call it, in
this fashion to prevent the fugitive from doubling back over
them.<note place='foot'>Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>The Essential Kafir</hi>,
p. 263.</note> When a Swaheli wishes to capture a runaway slave
he will sometimes take a string of coco-nut fibre to a wise
man and get him to recite a passage of the Koran seven
<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>
times over it, while at each reading the wizard ties a knot in
the string. Then the slave-owner, armed with the knotted
string, takes his stand in the door of the house and calls on
his slave seven times by name, after which he hangs the
string over the door.<note place='foot'>C. Velten, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten und Gebräuche
der Suaheli</hi> (Göttingen, 1903), p.
317.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Knots tied
by hunters
and
travellers.</note>
The obstructive power of knots and locks as means of
barring out evil manifests itself in many ways. Thus on the
principle that prevention is better than cure, Zulu hunters
immediately tie a knot in the tail of any animal they have
killed, because they believe that this will hinder the meat
from giving them pains in their stomachs.<note place='foot'>David Leslie, <hi rend='italic'>Among the Zulus
and Amatongas</hi> (Edinburgh, 1875),
p. 147.</note> An ancient Hindoo
book recommends that travellers on a dangerous road should
tie knots in the skirts of their garments, for this will cause
their journey to prosper.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Gríhya-Sûtras</hi>, translated by H.
Oldenberg, part i. p. 432, part ii.
p. 127 (Sacred Books of the East,
vols. xxix., xxx.).</note> Similarly among some Caffre
tribes, when a man is going on a doubtful journey, he knots
a few blades of grass together that the journey may turn out
well.<note place='foot'>J. Shooter, <hi rend='italic'>The Kafirs of Natal
and the Zulu Country</hi> (London, 1857),
pp. 217 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Laos hunters fancy that they can throw a spell
over a forest so as to prevent any one else from hunting
there successfully. Having killed game of any kind, they
utter certain magical words, while they knot together some
stalks of grass, adding, <q>As I knot this grass, so let no
hunter be lucky here.</q> The virtue of this spell will last, as
usually happens in such cases, so long as the stalks remain
knotted together.<note place='foot'>E. Aymonier, <hi rend='italic'>Notes sur le Laos</hi>
(Saigon, 1885), pp. 23 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Yabims of German New Guinea lay
a knot in a fishing-boat that is not ready for sea, in order
that a certain being called Balum may not embark in it; for
he has the power of taking away the fish and weighing down
the boat.<note place='foot'>Vetter, in <hi rend='italic'>Mitteilungen der geographischen
Gesellschaft zu Jena</hi>, xii.
(1893) p. 95.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Knots and locks
used as
protective
amulets in
Russia and
elsewhere.</note>
In Russia amulets often derive their protective virtue in
great measure from knots. Here, for example, is a spell
which will warrant its employer against all risk of being
shot: <q>I attach five knots to each hostile, infidel shooter,
over arquebuses, bows, and all manner of warlike weapons.
<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>
Do ye, O knots, bar the shooter from every road and way,
lock fast every arquebuse, entangle every bow, involve all
warlike weapons, so that the shooters may not reach me
with their arquebuses, nor may their arrows attain to me,
nor their warlike weapons do me hurt. In my knots lies
hid the mighty strength of snakes&mdash;from the twelve-headed
snake.</q> A net, from its affluence of knots, has always been
considered in Russia very efficacious against sorcerers; hence
in some places, when a bride is being dressed in her wedding
attire, a fishing-net is flung over her to keep her out of
harm's way. For a similar purpose the bridegroom and
his companions are often girt with pieces of net, or at least
with tight-drawn girdles, for before a wizard can begin
to injure them he must undo all the knots in the net,
or take off the girdles. But often a Russian amulet is
merely a knotted thread. A skein of red wool wound about
the arms and legs is thought to ward off agues and fevers;
and nine skeins, fastened round a child's neck, are deemed
a preservative against scarlatina. In the Tver Government
a bag of a special kind is tied to the neck of the cow which
walks before the rest of a herd, in order to keep off wolves;
its force binds the maw of the ravening beast. On the
same principle, a padlock is carried thrice round a herd of
horses before they go afield in the spring, and the bearer
locks and unlocks it as he goes, saying, <q>I lock from my
herd the mouths of the grey wolves with this steel lock.</q>
After the third round the padlock is finally locked, and then,
when the horses have gone off, it is hidden away somewhere
till late in the autumn, when the time comes for the drove to
return to winter quarters. In this case the <q>firm word</q> of
the spell is supposed to lock up the mouths of the wolves.
The Bulgarians have a similar mode of guarding their cattle
against wild beasts. A woman takes a needle and thread
after dark, and sews together the skirt of her dress. A child
asks her what she is doing, and she tells him that she is
sewing up the ears, eyes, and jaws of the wolves so that they
may not hear, see, or bite the sheep, goats, calves, and pigs.<note place='foot'>W. R. S. Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Songs of the Russian People</hi>, pp. 388-390.</note>
Similarly in antiquity a witch fancied that she could shut
the mouths of her enemies by sewing up the mouth of a fish
<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>
with a bronze needle,<note place='foot'>Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, ii. 577 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; compare
W. Warde Fowler, <hi rend='italic'>Roman Festivals
of the Period of the Republic</hi>,
pp. 309 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and farmers attempted to ward off
hail from their crops by tying keys to ropes all round the
fields.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Geoponica</hi>, i. 14.</note> The Armenians essay to lock the jaws of wolves
by uttering a spell, tying seven knots in a shoe-lace, and
placing the string between the teeth of a wool-comber, which
are probably taken to represent the fangs of a wolf.<note place='foot'>M. Abeghian, <hi rend='italic'>Der armenische
Volksglaube</hi>, p. 115.</note> And
an Armenian bride and bridegroom will carry a locked lock
on their persons at and after marriage to guard them
against those evil influences to which at this crisis of life
they are especially exposed.<note place='foot'>M. Abeghian, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 91.</note> The following mode of
keeping an epidemic from a village is known to have been
practised among the Balkan Slavs. Two old women
proceed to a spot outside the village, the one with a copper
kettle full of water, the other with a house-lock and key.
The old dame with the kettle asks the other, <q>Whither
away?</q> The one with the lock answers, <q>I came to lock
the village against mishap,</q> and suiting the action to the
words she locks the lock and throws it, together with the
key, into the kettle of water. Then she strides thrice round
the village, each time repeating the performance with the
lock and kettle.<note place='foot'>V. Titelbach, <q>Das heilige Feuer
bei den Balkanslaven,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Internationales
Archiv für Ethnographie</hi>, xiii. (1900)
p. 3.</note> To this day a Transylvanian sower thinks
he can keep birds from the corn by carrying a lock in the
seed-bag.<note place='foot'>A. Heinrich, <hi rend='italic'>Agrarische Sitten
und Gebräuche unter den Sachsen
Siebenbürgens</hi> (Hermannstadt, 1880),
p. 9.</note> Such magical uses of locks and keys are clearly
parallel to the magical use of knots, with which we are here
concerned. In Ceylon the Singhalese observe <q>a curious
custom of the threshing-floor called <q>Goigote</q>&mdash;the tying of
the cultivator's knot. When a sheaf of corn has been
threshed out, before it is removed the grain is heaped up
and the threshers, generally six in number, sit round it, and
taking a few stalks, with the ears of corn attached, jointly
tie a knot and bury it in the heap. It is left there until all
the sheaves have been threshed, and the corn winnowed
and measured. The object of this ceremony is to prevent
the devils from diminishing the quantity of corn in the
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
heap.</q><note place='foot'>C. J. R. Le Mesurier, <q>Customs
and Superstitions connected with the
Cultivation of Rice in the Southern
Province of Ceylon,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Royal Asiatic Society</hi>, N.S., xvii.
(1885) p. 371.</note> Knots and locks may serve to avert not only devils
but death itself. When they brought a woman to the stake
at St. Andrews in 1572 to burn her alive for a witch, they
found on her a white cloth like a collar, with strings and
many knots on the strings. They took it from her, sorely
against her will, for she seemed to think that she could not
die in the fire, if only the cloth with the knotted strings
was on her. When it was taken away, she said, <q>Now I
have no hope of myself.</q><note place='foot'>J. G. Dalyell, <hi rend='italic'>Darker Superstitions
of Scotland</hi>, p. 307.</note> In many parts of England it is
thought that a person cannot die so long as any locks are
locked or bolts shot in the house. It is therefore a very
common practice to undo all locks and bolts when the
sufferer is plainly near his end, in order that his agony
may not be unduly prolonged.<note place='foot'>J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, ii.
231 (Bohn's edition); R. Hunt,
<hi rend='italic'>Popular Romances of the West of
England</hi>, p. 379; T. F. Thiselton
Dyer, <hi rend='italic'>English Folk-lore</hi>, pp. 229 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
On the other hand the Karaits, a
Jewish sect in the Crimea, lock all
cupboards when a person is in the last
agony, lest their contents should be
polluted by the contagion of death.
See S. Weissenberg, <q>Die Karäer
der Krim,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxxxiv. (1903) p.
143.</note> For example, in the
year 1863, at Taunton, a child lay sick of scarlatina
and death seemed inevitable. <q>A jury of matrons was,
as it were, empanelled, and to prevent the child <q>dying
hard</q> all the doors in the house, all the drawers, all the
boxes, all the cupboards were thrown wide open, the keys
taken out, and the body of the child placed under a beam,
whereby a sure, certain, and easy passage into eternity could
be secured.</q> Strange to say, the child declined to avail
itself of the facilities for dying so obligingly placed at its
disposal by the sagacity and experience of the British matrons
of Taunton; it preferred to live rather than give up the
ghost just then.<note place='foot'>Extract from <hi rend='italic'>The Times</hi> of 4th
September 1863, quoted in <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>,
xix. (1908) p. 336.</note> A Masai man whose sons have gone out to
war will take a hair and tie a knot in it for each of his absent
sons, praying God to keep their bodies and souls as firmly
fastened together as these knots.<note place='foot'>M. Merker, <hi rend='italic'>Die Masai</hi> (Berlin,
1904), p. 98.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
magical
virtue of
a knot is
always
that of an
impediment
or
hindrance
whether
for good
or evil.</note>
The precise mode in which the virtue of the knot is
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>
supposed to take effect in some of these instances does not
clearly appear. But in general we may say that in all
the cases we have been considering the leading characteristic
of the magic knot or lock is that, in strict accordance
with its physical nature, it always acts as an impediment,
hindrance, or obstacle, and that its influence is maleficent or
beneficent according as the thing which it impedes or hinders
is good or evil. The obstructive tendency attributed to the
knot in spiritual matters appears in a Swiss superstition
that if, in sewing a corpse into its shroud, you make a
knot on the thread, it will hinder the soul of the deceased
on its passage to eternity.<note place='foot'>H. Runge, <q>Volksglaube in der
Schweiz,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für deutsche
Mythologie und Sittenkunde</hi>, iv. (1859)
p. 178, § 25. The belief is reported
from Zurich.</note> In coffining a corpse the
Highlanders of Scotland used to untie or cut every string in
the shroud; else the spirit could not rest.<note place='foot'>J. G. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Witchcraft and
Second Sight in the Highlands and
Islands of Scotland</hi>, p. 174; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Superstitions
of the Highlands and Islands of
Scotland</hi>, p. 241.</note> The Germans
of Transylvania place a little pillow with the dead in the
coffin; but in sewing it they take great care not to make
any knot on the thread, for they say that to do so would
hinder the dead man from resting in the grave and his
widow from marrying again.<note place='foot'>E. Gerard, <hi rend='italic'>The Land beyond the
Forest</hi>, i. 208.</note> Among the Pidhireanes, a
Ruthenian people on the hem of the Carpathians, when
a widow wishes to marry again soon, she unties the knots
on her dead husband's grave-clothes before the coffin is shut
down on him. This removes all impediments to her future
marriage.<note place='foot'>R. F. Kaindl, <q>Volksüberlieferungen
der Pidhireane,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxxiii.
(1898) p. 251.</note> A Nandi who is starting on a journey will tie
a knot in grass by the wayside, as he believes that by so
doing he will prevent the people whom he is going to
visit from taking their meal till he arrives, or at all
events he will ensure that they leave enough food over
for him.<note place='foot'>A. C. Hollis, <hi rend='italic'>The Nandi</hi> (Oxford,
1909), pp. 89 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The tying and untying
of magic knots was forbidden by
the Coptic church, but we are not told
the purposes for which the knots were
used. See <hi rend='italic'>Il Fetha Nagast o legislazione
dei re, codice ecclesiastico e
civile di Abissinia</hi>, tradotto e annotato
da Ignazio Guidi (Rome, 1899), p. 140.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The rule
that at
certain
magical
and
religious
rites the
hair should
be loose
and the
feet bare is
probably
based on a
fear of the
impediment
which
is thought
to be
caused by
any knot
or constriction.
Custom of
going on
certain
solemn
occasions
with one
shoe on
and one
shoe off.</note>
The rule which prescribes that at certain magical and
religious ceremonies the hair should hang loose and the feet
<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>
should be bare<note place='foot'>For examples see Horace, <hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> i.
8, 23 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> iii. 370, iv.
509; Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Metam.</hi> vii. 182 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Tibullus, i. 3. 29-32; Petronius, <hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> 44;
Aulus Gellius, iv. 3. 3; Columella,
<hi rend='italic'>De re rustica</hi>, x. 357-362; Athenaeus,
v. 28, p. 198 <hi rend='smallcaps'>e</hi>; Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge
inscriptionum Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> Nos. 653
(lines 23 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>) and 939; Ch. Michel,
<hi rend='italic'>Recueil d'inscriptions grecques</hi>, No.
694. Compare Servius on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi>
iv. 518, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In sacris nihil solet esse
religatum.</foreign></q></note> is probably based on the same fear of
trammelling and impeding the action in hand, whatever it
may be, by the presence of any knot or constriction,
whether on the head or on the feet of the performer. This
connexion of ideas comes out clearly in a passage of Ovid, who
bids a pregnant woman loosen her hair before she prays to the
goddess of childbirth, in order that the goddess may gently
loose her teeming womb.<note place='foot'>Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, iii. 257 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> It is less easy to say why on
certain solemn occasions it appears to have been customary
with some people to go with one shoe off and one shoe on.
The forlorn hope of two hundred men who, on a dark and
stormy night, stole out of Plataea, broke through the lines
of the besieging Spartans, and escaped from the doomed
city, were shod on the left foot only. The historian who
records the fact assumes that the intention was to prevent
their feet from slipping in the mud.<note place='foot'>Thucydides, iii. 22.</note> But if so, why were
not both feet unshod or shod? What is good for the one
foot is surely good for the other. The peculiar attire of the
Plataeans on this occasion had probably nothing to do with
the particular state of the ground and the weather at the time
when they made their desperate sally, but was an old custom,
a form of consecration or devotion, observed by men in any
great hazard or grave emergency. Certainly the costume
appears to have been regularly worn by some fighting
races in antiquity, at least when they went forth to battle.
Thus we are told that all the Aetolians were shod only on
one foot, <q>because they were so warlike,</q><note place='foot'>Schol. on Pindar, <hi rend='italic'>Pyth.</hi> iv.
133.</note> and Virgil
represents some of the rustic militia of ancient Latium as
marching to war, their right feet shod in boots of raw hide,
while their left feet were bare.<note place='foot'>Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> vii. 689 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> An oracle warned Pelias,
king of Iolcus, to beware of the man with one sandal, and
when Jason arrived with a sandal on his right foot but with
his left foot bare, the king recognised the hand of fate. The
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>
common story that Jason had lost one of his sandals in
fording a river was probably invented when the real motive
of the costume was forgotten.<note place='foot'>Pindar, <hi rend='italic'>Pyth.</hi> iv. 129 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>:
Apollonius Rhodius, <hi rend='italic'>Argonaut.</hi> i. 5
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Apollodorus, i. 9. 16.</note> Again, according to one
legend Perseus seems to have worn only one shoe when he
went on his perilous enterprise to cut off the Gorgon's head.<note place='foot'>Artemidorus, <hi rend='italic'>Onirocrit.</hi> iv. 63.
At Chemmis in Upper Egypt there was
a temple of Perseus, and the people
said that from time to time Perseus
appeared to them and they found his
great sandal, two cubits long, which
was a sign of prosperity for the whole
land of Egypt. See Herodotus, ii.
91.</note>
In certain forms of purification Greek ritual appears to have
required that the person to be cleansed should wear a
rough shoe on one foot, while the other was unshod. The
rule is not mentioned by ancient writers, but may be
inferred from a scene painted on a Greek vase, where a
man, naked except for a fillet round his head, is seen
crouching on the skin of a sacrificial victim, his bare right
foot resting on the skin, while his left foot, shod in a
rough boot, is planted on the ground in front of him.
Round about women with torches and vessels are engaged
in performing ceremonies of purification over him.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Gazette archéologique</hi>, 1884,
plates 44, 45, 46 with the remarks of
De Witte and F. Lenormant, pp. 352
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The skin on which the man is
crouching is probably the so-called
<q>fleece of Zeus</q> (Διὸς κώδιον), as to
which see Hesychius and Suidas, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>;
Polemo, ed. Preller, pp. 140-142; C.
A. Lobeck, <hi rend='italic'>Aglaophamus</hi>, pp. 183
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Compare my note on Pausanias,
ii. 31. 8.</note> When
Dido in Virgil, deserted by Aeneas, has resolved to die, she
feigns to perform certain magical rites which will either win
back her false lover or bring relief to her wounded heart.
In appealing to the gods and the stars, she stands by the
altar with her dress loosened and with one foot bare.<note place='foot'>Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> iv. 517 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
Among the heathen Arabs the cursing of an enemy was a
public act. The maledictions were often couched in the
form of a satirical poem, which the poet himself recited with
certain solemn formalities. Thus when the young Lebid
appeared at the Court of Norman to denounce the Absites,
he anointed the hair of his head on one side only, let his
garment hang down loosely, and wore but one shoe. This,
we are told, was the costume regularly adopted by certain
poets on such occasions.<note place='foot'>I. Goldziher, <q>Der Dîwân des
Garwal b. Aus Al-Hutej' a,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft</hi>,
xlvi. (1892) p. 5.</note>
</p>

<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
intention
of going
with one
shoe on
and one
shoe off
on such
occasions
seems to
be to free
the man
so attired
from
magical
constraint
and to lay
it on his
enemy.</note>
Thus various peoples seem to be of opinion that it stands
a man in good stead to go with one foot shod and one foot
bare on certain momentous occasions. But why? The
explanation must apparently be sought in the magical virtue
attributed to knots; for down to recent times, we may take
it, shoes have been universally tied to the feet by latchets.
Now the magical action of a knot, as we have seen, is
supposed to be to bind and restrain not merely the body
but the soul,<note place='foot'>See Servius, on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> iii.
370: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In ratione sacrorum par est et
animae et corporis causa: nam plerumque
quae non possunt circa animam
fieri fiunt circa corpus, ut solvere vel
ligare, quo possit anima, quod per se
non potest, ex cognatione sentire.</foreign></q></note> and this action is beneficial or harmful
according as the thing which is bound and restrained is evil
or good. It is a necessary corollary of this doctrine that to
be without knots is to be free and untrammelled, which, by
the way, may be the reason why the augur's staff at Rome
had to be made from a piece of wood in which there was no
knot;<note place='foot'>Livy, i. 18. 7.</note> it would never do for a divining rod to be spell-bound.
Hence we may suppose that the intention of going
with one shoe on and one shoe off is both to restrain and to
set at liberty, to bind and to unbind. But to bind or unbind
whom or what? Perhaps the notion is to rid the man
himself of magical restraint, but to lay it on his foe, or at
all events on his foe's magic; in short, to bind his enemy
by a spell while he himself goes free. This is substantially
the explanation which the acute and learned Servius gives
of Dido's costume. He says that she went with one shoe on
and one shoe off in order that Aeneas might be entangled
and herself released.<note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>UNUM EXUTA PEDEM
quia id agitur, ut et ista solvatur et
implicetur Aeneas</foreign>,</q> Servius, on Virgil,
<hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> iv. 518.</note> An analogous explanation would
obviously apply to all the other cases we have considered,
for in all of them the man who wears this peculiar
costume is confronted with hostile powers, whether human
or supernatural, which it must be his object to lay under
a ban.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rings
also are
regarded
as magical
fetters
which prevent the
egress or
ingress of
spirits.</note>
A similar power to bind and hamper spiritual as well as
bodily activities is ascribed by some people to rings. Thus
in the Greek island of Carpathus, people never button the
clothes they put upon a dead body and they are careful to
<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>
remove all rings from it; <q>for the spirit, they say, can even
be detained in the little finger, and cannot rest.</q><note place='foot'><q>On a Far-off Island,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Blackwood's
Magazine</hi>, February 1886,
p. 238.</note> Here it
is plain that even if the soul is not definitely supposed to
issue at death from the finger-tips, yet the ring is conceived
to exercise a certain constrictive influence which detains and
imprisons the immortal spirit in spite of its efforts to escape
from the tabernacle of clay; in short the ring, like the knot,
acts as a spiritual fetter. This may have been the reason of
an ancient Greek maxim, attributed to Pythagoras, which
forbade people to wear rings.<note place='foot'>Clement of Alexandria, <hi rend='italic'>Strom.</hi> v.
5. 28, p. 662, ed. Potter; Jamblichus,
<hi rend='italic'>Adhortatio ad philosophiam</hi>, 23;
Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>De educatione puerorum</hi>, 17.
According to others, all that Pythagoras
forbade was the wearing of a
ring on which the likeness of a god
was engraved (Diogenes Laertius, viii.
1. 17; Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>Vit. Pythag.</hi> 42;
Suidas, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> Πυθαγόρας); according to
Julian a ring was only forbidden if it
bore the names of the gods (Julian, <hi rend='italic'>Or.</hi>
vii. p. 236 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>, p. 306 ed. Dindorf). I
have shewn elsewhere that the maxims
or symbols of Pythagoras, as they were
called, are in great measure merely
popular superstitions (<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, i.
(1890) pp. 147 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>).</note> Nobody might enter the
ancient Arcadian sanctuary of the Mistress at Lycosura with
a ring on his or her finger.<note place='foot'>This we learn from an inscription
found on the site. See Ἐφημερὶς ἀρχαιολογική,
Athens, 1898, col. 249;
Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 939.</note> Persons who consulted the
oracle of Faunus had to be chaste, to eat no flesh, and
to wear no rings.<note place='foot'>Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, iv. 657 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rings
worn as
amulets
against
demons,
witches,
and ghosts. Reason
why the
Flamen
Dialis
might not
wear knots
and rings.</note>
On the other hand, the same constriction which
hinders the egress of the soul may prevent the entrance of
evil spirits; hence we find rings used as amulets against
demons, witches, and ghosts. In the Tyrol it is said that
a woman in childbed should never take off her wedding-ring,
or spirits and witches will have power over her.<note place='foot'>I. V. Zingerle, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten, Bräuche
und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
p. 3.</note>
Among the Lapps, the person who is about to place a
corpse in the coffin receives from the husband, wife, or
children of the deceased a brass ring, which he must wear
fastened to his right arm until the corpse is safely deposited
in the grave. The ring is believed to serve the person as
an amulet against any harm which the ghost might do to
him.<note place='foot'>J. Scheffer, <hi rend='italic'>Lapponia</hi> (Frankfort,
1673), p. 313.</note> The Huzuls of the Carpathians sometimes milk a
cow through a wedding-ring to prevent witches from stealing
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
its milk.<note place='foot'>R. F. Kaindl, <hi rend='italic'>Die Huzulen</hi>
(Vienna, 1894), p. 89; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Viehzucht
und Viehzauber in den Ostkarpaten,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxix. (1896) p. 386.</note> In India iron rings are often worn as an amulet
against disease or to counteract the malignant influence of
the planet Saturn. A coral ring is used in Gujarat to ward
off the baleful influence of the sun, and in Bengal mourners
touch it as a form of purification.<note place='foot'>W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion and
Folk-lore of Northern India</hi> (Westminster,
1896), ii. 13, 16.</note> A Masai mother who
has lost one or more children at an early age will put a
copper ring on the second toe of her next infant's right foot
to guard it against sickness.<note place='foot'>M. Merker, <hi rend='italic'>Die Masai</hi> (Berlin,
1904), p. 143.</note> Masai men also wear on the
middle finger of the right hand a ring made out of the hide
of a sacrificial victim; it is supposed to protect the wearer
from witchcraft and disease of every kind.<note place='foot'>M. Merker, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 200 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
202; compare, <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> p. 250.</note> We have seen
that magic cords are fastened round the wrists of Siamese
children to keep off evil spirits;<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>.</note> that some people tie strings
round the wrists of women in childbed, of convalescents after
sickness, and of mourners after a funeral in order to prevent
the escape of their souls at these critical seasons;<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>.</note> and that
with the same intention the Bagobos put brass rings on
the wrists or ankles of the sick.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>.</note> This use of wrist-bands,
bracelets, and anklets as amulets to keep the soul in the
body is exactly parallel to the use of finger-rings which we
are here considering. The placing of these spiritual fetters
on the wrists is especially appropriate, because some people
fancy that a soul resides wherever a pulse is felt beating.<note place='foot'>De la Borde, <q>Relation de l'origine,
etc., des Caraibes sauvages,</q> p.
15, in <hi rend='italic'>Recueil de divers voyages faits en
Afrique et en l'Amérique</hi> (Paris, 1684).</note>
How far the custom of wearing finger-rings, bracelets, and
anklets may have been influenced by, or even have sprung
from, a belief in their efficacy as amulets to keep the soul in
the body, or demons out of it, is a question which seems worth
considering.<note place='foot'>A considerable body of evidence
as to rings and the virtues attributed
to them has been collected by Mr. W.
Jones in his work <hi rend='italic'>Finger-ring Lore</hi>
(London, 1877). See also W. G.
Black, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-medicine</hi>, pp. 172-177.</note> Here we are only concerned with the belief
in so far as it seems to throw light on the rule that the
Flamen Dialis might not wear a ring unless it were broken.
Taken in conjunction with the rule which forbade him to
<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>
have a knot on his garments, it points to a fear that the
powerful spirit embodied in him might be trammelled and
hampered in its goings-out and comings-in by such corporeal
and spiritual fetters as rings and knots. The same fear
probably dictated the rule that if a man in bonds were taken
into the house of the Flamen Dialis, the captive was to be
unbound and the cords to be drawn up through a hole in the
roof and so let down into the street.<note place='foot'>Aulus Gellius, x. 15. 8. See
above, p. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>.</note> Further, we may
conjecture that the custom of releasing prisoners at a festival
may have originated in the same train of thought; it might
be imagined that their fetters would impede the flow of the
divine grace. The custom was observed at the Greek
festival of the Thesmophoria,<note place='foot'>Marcellinus on Hermogenes, in
<hi rend='italic'>Rhetores Graeci</hi>, ed. Walz, iv. 462;
Sopater, <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> viii. 67.</note> and at the Athenian festival
of Dionysus in the city.<note place='foot'>Demosthenes, <hi rend='italic'>Contra Androt.</hi> 68,
p. 614; P. Foucart, <hi rend='italic'>Le Culte de
Dionysos en Attique</hi> (Paris, 1904), p.
168.</note> At the great festival of the Dassera,
celebrated in October by the Goorkhas of Nepaul, all the law
courts are closed, and all prisoners in gaol are removed from
the precincts of the city; but those who are imprisoned outside
the city do not have to change their place of confinement at
the time of the Dassera.<note place='foot'>H. A. Oldfield, <hi rend='italic'>Sketches from
Nipal</hi> (London, 1880), ii. 342 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> This Nepaulese custom appears
strongly to support the explanation here suggested of such
gaol-deliveries. For observe that the prisoners are not released,
but merely removed from the city. The intention is therefore
not to allow them to share the general happiness, but merely
to rid the city of their inopportune presence at the festival.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Gordian
knot was
perhaps a
royal talisman.</note>
Before quitting the subject of knots I may be allowed
to hazard a conjecture as to the meaning of the famous
Gordian knot, which Alexander the Great, failing in his
efforts to untie it, cut through with his sword. In Gordium,
the ancient capital of the kings of Phrygia, there was preserved
a waggon of which the yoke was fastened to the pole
by a strip of cornel-bark or a vine-shoot twisted and tied in
an intricate knot. Tradition ran that the waggon had been
dedicated by Midas, the first king of the dynasty, and that
whoever untied the knot would be ruler of Asia.<note place='foot'>Arrian, <hi rend='italic'>Anabasis</hi>, ii. 3; Quintus
Curtius, iii. 1; Justin, xi. 7; Schol.
on Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Hippolytus</hi>, 671.</note> Perhaps
<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>
the knot was a talisman with which the fate of the dynasty
was believed to be bound up in such a way that whenever
the knot was loosed the reign of the dynasty would come
to an end. We have seen that the magic virtue ascribed
to knots is naturally enough supposed to last only so long
as they remain untied. If the Gordian knot was the talisman
of the Phrygian kings, the local fame it enjoyed, as
guaranteeing to them the rule of Phrygia, might easily be
exaggerated by distant rumour into a report that the sceptre
of Asia itself would fall to him who should undo the wondrous
knot.<note place='foot'>Public talismans, on which the
safety of the state was supposed to
depend, were common in antiquity.
See C. A. Lobeck, <hi rend='italic'>Aglaophamus</hi>, pp.
278 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, and my note on Pausanias,
viii. 47. 5.</note>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI. Tabooed Words.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. Personal Names tabooed.'/>
<head>§ 1. Personal Names tabooed.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The savage
confuses
words and
things, and
hence
regards his
name as a
vital part
of himself,
and fancies
that he
can be
magically
injured
through it.</note>
Unable to discriminate clearly between words and things,
the savage commonly fancies that the link between a name
and the person or thing denominated by it is not a mere
arbitrary and ideal association, but a real and substantial
bond which unites the two in such a way that magic may
be wrought on a man just as easily through his name as
through his hair, his nails, or any other material part of
his person.<note place='foot'>On the primitive conception of the
relation of names to persons and things,
see E. B. Tylor, <hi rend='italic'>Early History of Mankind</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
pp. 123 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; R. Andree, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographische
Parallelen und Vergleiche</hi>
(Stuttgart, 1878), pp. 165 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; E.
Clodd, <hi rend='italic'>Tom-tit-tot</hi> (London, 1898), pp.
53 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 79 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> In what follows I
have used with advantage the works of
all these writers.</note> In fact, primitive man regards his name as
a vital portion of himself and takes care of it accordingly.
Thus, for example, the North American Indian <q>regards his
name, not as a mere label, but as a distinct part of his personality,
just as much as are his eyes or his teeth, and believes
that injury will result as surely from the malicious handling of
his name as from a wound inflicted on any part of his physical
organism. This belief was found among the various tribes
from the Atlantic to the Pacific, and has occasioned a
number of curious regulations in regard to the concealment
and change of names. It may be on this account that both
Powhatan and Pocahontas are known in history under
assumed appellations, their true names having been concealed
from the whites until the pseudonyms were too
firmly established to be supplanted. Should his prayers
<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
have no apparent effect when treating a patient for some
serious illness, the shaman sometimes concludes that the
name is affected, and accordingly goes to water, with
appropriate ceremonies, and christens the patient with a
new name, by which he is henceforth to be known. He
then begins afresh, repeating the formulas with the new
name selected for the patient, in the confident hope that his
efforts will be crowned with success.</q><note place='foot'>J. Mooney, <q>Sacred Formulas of
the Cherokees,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Seventh Annual Report
of the Bureau of Ethnology</hi> (Washington,
1891), p. 343.</note> Some Esquimaux
take new names when they are old, hoping thereby to get a
new lease of life.<note place='foot'>E. W. Nelson, <q>The Eskimo
about Bering Strait,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Eighteenth
Annual Report of the Bureau of
American Ethnology</hi>, part i. (Washington,
1899) p. 289.</note> The Tolampoos of central Celebes
believe that if you write a man's name down you can carry
off his soul along with it. On that account the headman of
a village appeared uneasy when Mr. A. C. Kruijt wrote
down his name. He entreated the missionary to erase it,
and was only reassured on being told that it was not his
real name but merely his second name that had been put on
paper. Again, when the same missionary took down the
names of villages from the lips of a woman, she asked him
anxiously if he would not thereby take away the soul of the
villages and so cause the inhabitants to fall sick.<note place='foot'>A. C. Kruijt, <q>Van Paloppo naar
Posso,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege het
Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xlii. (1898) pp. 61 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> If we
may judge from the evidence of language, this crude
conception of the relation of names to persons was widely
prevalent, if not universal, among the forefathers of the
Aryan race. For an analysis of the words for <q>name</q> in
the various languages of that great family of speech points
to the conclusion that <q>the Celts, and certain other widely
separated Aryans, unless we should rather say the whole
Aryan family, believed at one time not only that the name
was a part of the man, but that it was that part of him
which is termed the soul, the breath of life, or whatever you
may choose to define it as being.</q><note place='foot'>Professor (Sir) J. Rhys, <q>Welsh
Fairies,</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Nineteenth Century</hi>, xxx.
(July-December 1891) pp. 566 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> However this may
have been among the primitive Aryans, it is quite certain
that many savages at the present day regard their names as
vital parts of themselves, and therefore take great pains to
<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>
conceal their real names, lest these should give to evil-disposed
persons a handle by which to injure their owners.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Australian
savages
keep their
names
secret lest
sorcerers
should
injure
them by
means of
their
names.</note>
Thus, to begin with the savages who rank at the bottom
of the social scale, we are told that the secrecy with which
among the Australian aborigines personal names are often
kept from general knowledge <q>arises in great measure from
the belief that an enemy, who knows your name, has in it
something which he can use magically to your detriment.</q><note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of
South-East Australia</hi>, p. 377; compare
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> p. 440.</note>
<q>An Australian black,</q> says another writer, <q>is always very
unwilling to tell his real name, and there is no doubt that
this reluctance is due to the fear that through his name he
may be injured by sorcerers.</q><note place='foot'>R. Brough Smyth, <hi rend='italic'>Aborigines of
Victoria</hi>, i. 469, note.</note> On Herbert River in Queensland
the wizards, in order to practise their arts against some
one, <q>need only to know the name of the person in question,
and for this reason they rarely use their proper names in
addressing or speaking of each other, but simply their class
names.</q><note place='foot'>C. Lumholtz, <hi rend='italic'>Among Cannibals</hi>
(London, 1889), p. 280.</note> In the tribes of south-eastern Australia <q>when
the new name is given at initiation, the child's name
becomes secret, not to be revealed to strangers, or to be
mentioned by friends. The reason appears to be that a
name is part of a person, and therefore can be made use of
to that person's detriment by any who wish to <q>catch</q> him
by evil magic.</q><note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 736.</note> Thus among the Yuin of New South
Wales the totem name is said to have been something magical
rather than a mere name in our sense, and it was kept secret
lest an enemy should injure its bearer by sorcery. The name
was revealed to a youth by his father at initiation, but very
few other people knew it.<note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 133.</note> Another writer, who knew the
Australians well, observes that in many tribes the belief
prevails <q>that the life of an enemy may be taken by the
use of his name in incantations. The consequence of this
idea is, that in the tribes in which it obtains, the name
of the male is given up for ever at the time when he undergoes
the first of a series of ceremonies which end in conferring
the rights of manhood. In such tribes a man has no
name, and when a man desires to attract the attention of
<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>
any male of his tribe who is out of his boyhood, instead of
calling him by name, he addresses him as brother, nephew,
or cousin, as the case may be, or by the name of the class
to which he belongs. I used to notice, when I lived amongst
the Bangerang, that the names which the males bore in
infancy were soon almost forgotten by the tribe.</q><note place='foot'>E. M. Curr, <hi rend='italic'>The Australian Race</hi>,
i. 46.</note> It may
be questioned, however, whether the writer whom I have just
quoted was not deceived in thinking that among these tribes
men gave up their individual names on passing through the
ceremony of initiation into manhood. It is more in harmony
with savage beliefs and practices to suppose either that the
old names were retained but dropped out of use in daily life,
or that new names were given at initiation and sedulously
concealed from fear of sorcery. A missionary who resided
among the aborigines at Lake Tyers, in Victoria, informs us
that <q>the blacks have great objections to speak of a person
by name. In speaking to each other they address the
person spoken to as brother, cousin, friend, or whatever
relation the person spoken to bears. Sometimes a black
bears a name which we would term merely a nickname, as
the left-handed, or the bad-handed, or the little man. They
would speak of a person by this name while living, but they
would never mention the proper name. I found great difficulty
in collecting the native names of the blacks here. I
found afterwards that they had given me wrong names; and,
on asking the reason why, was informed they had two or
three names, but they never mentioned their right name for
fear any one got it, then they would die.</q><note place='foot'>J. Bulmer, in Brough Smyth's
<hi rend='italic'>Aborigines of Victoria</hi>, ii. 94. The
writer appears to mean that the natives
feared they would die if any one, or at
any rate, an enemy, learned their real
names.</note> Amongst the
tribes of central Australia every man, woman, and child has,
besides a personal name which is in common use, a secret or
sacred name which is bestowed by the older men upon him
or her soon after birth, and which is known to none but the
fully initiated members of the group. This secret name is
never mentioned except upon the most solemn occasions; to
utter it in the hearing of women or of men of another group
would be a most serious breach of tribal custom, as serious as
<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>
the most flagrant case of sacrilege among ourselves. When
mentioned at all, the name is spoken only in a whisper, and
not until the most elaborate precautions have been taken
that it shall be heard by no one but members of the group.
<q>The native thinks that a stranger knowing his secret
name would have special power to work him ill by means
of magic.</q><note place='foot'>Spencer and Gillen, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes
of Central Australia</hi>, p. 139; compare
<hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> p. 637; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Northern Tribes of
Central Australia</hi>, pp. 584 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The same
fear of
sorcery has
led people
to conceal
their names
in Egypt,
Africa,
Asia, and
the East
Indies.</note>
The same fear seems to have led to a custom of the same
sort amongst the ancient Egyptians, whose comparatively
high civilisation was strangely dashed and chequered with
relics of the lowest savagery. Every Egyptian received
two names, which were known respectively as the true
name and the good name, or the great name and the little
name; and while the good or little name was made public,
the true or great name appears to have been carefully
concealed.<note place='foot'>E. Lefébure, <q>La Vertu et la vie
du nom en Égypte,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mélusine</hi>, viii.
(1897) coll. 226 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Similarly in Abyssinia at the present day it is
customary to conceal the real name which a person receives
at baptism and to call him only by a sort of nickname which
his mother gives him on leaving the church. The reason
for this concealment is that a sorcerer cannot act upon a
person whose real name he does not know. But if he has
ascertained his victim's real name, the magician takes a particular
kind of straw, and muttering something over it bends
it into a circle and places it under a stone. The person
aimed at is taken ill at the very moment of the bending of
the straw; and if the straw snaps, he dies.<note place='foot'>Mansfield Parkyns, <hi rend='italic'>Life in Abyssinia</hi>
(London, 1868), pp. 301 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> A Brahman
child receives two names, one for common use, the other a
secret name which none but his father and mother should
know. The latter is only used at ceremonies such as
marriage. The custom is intended to protect the person
against magic, since a charm only becomes effectual in
combination with the real name.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Grihya Sûtras</hi>, translated by H.
Oldenberg, part i. pp. 50, 183, 395,
part ii. pp. 55, 215, 281; A. Hillebrandt,
<hi rend='italic'>Vedische Opfer und Zauber</hi>, pp.
46, 170 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. Caland, <hi rend='italic'>Altindisches
Zauberritual</hi>, p. 162, note <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>20</hi>; D. C. J.
Ibbetson, <hi rend='italic'>Outlines of Punjáb Ethnography</hi>
(Calcutta, 1883), p. 118; W.
Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion and Folklore
of Northern India</hi> (Westminster,
1896), i. 24, ii. 5; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Natives of
Northern India</hi> (London, 1907), p.
199.</note> Amongst the Kru
<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>
negroes of West Africa a man's real name is always concealed
from all but his nearest relations; to other people
he is known only under an assumed name.<note place='foot'>A. B. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>The Tshi-speaking
Peoples of the Gold Coast</hi>, p. 109.</note> The Ewe-speaking
people of the Slave Coast <q>believe that there is a
real and material connexion between a man and his name,
and that by means of the name injury may be done to the
man. An illustration of this has been given in the case of
the tree-stump that is beaten with a stone to compass the
death of an enemy; for the name of that enemy is not pronounced
solely with the object of informing the animating
principle of the stump who it is whose death is desired, but
through a belief that, by pronouncing the name, the personality
of the man who bears it is in some way brought to
the stump.</q><note place='foot'>A. B. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>The Ewe-speaking
Peoples of the Slave Coast</hi>, p. 98.</note> The Wolofs of Senegambia are very much
annoyed if any one calls them in a loud voice, even by day;
for they say that their name will be remembered by an evil
spirit and made use of by him to do them a mischief at
night.<note place='foot'>L. J. B. Bérenger-Féraud, <hi rend='italic'>Les
Peuples de la Sénégambie</hi> (Paris, 1879),
p. 28.</note> Similarly, the natives of Nias believe that harm may
be done to a person by the demons who hear his name pronounced.
Hence the names of infants, who are especially
exposed to the assaults of evil spirits, are never spoken;
and often in haunted spots, such as the gloomy depths of
the forest, the banks of a river, or beside a bubbling spring,
men will abstain from calling each other by their names for
a like reason.<note place='foot'>E. Modigliani, <hi rend='italic'>Un Viaggio a Nías</hi>
(Milan, 1890), p. 465.</note> Among the hill tribes of Assam each individual
has a private name which may not be revealed.
Should any one imprudently allow his private name to be
known, the whole village is tabooed for two days and a
feast is provided at the expense of the culprit.<note place='foot'>T. C. Hodson, <q>The <foreign rend='italic'>genna</foreign>
amongst the Tribes of Assam,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxvi.
(1906) p. 97.</note> A Manegre,
of the upper valley of the Amoor, will never mention his
own name nor that of one of his fellows. Only the names
of children are an exception to this rule.<note place='foot'>C. de Sabir, <q>Quelques notes sur
les Manègres,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de la Société
de Géographie</hi> (Paris), Vme Série, i.
(1861) p. 51.</note> A Bagobo
man of Mindanao, one of the Philippine Islands, never
<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>
utters his own name from fear of being turned into a
raven, because the raven croaks out its own name.<note place='foot'>A. Schadenburg, <q>Die Bewohner
von Süd-Mindanao und der Insel
Samal,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</hi>,
xvii. (1885) p. 30.</note>
The natives of the East Indian island of Buru, and the
Manggarais of West Flores are forbidden by custom to
mention their own names.<note place='foot'>J. H. W. van der Miesen, <q>Een
en ander over Boeroe,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xlvi. (1902) p. 455; J.
W. Meerburg, <q>Proeve einer beschrijving
van land en volk van Midden-Manggarai
(West-Flores), Afdeeling
Bima,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land-
en Volkenkunde</hi>, xxxiv. (1891)
p. 465.</note> When Fafnir had received
his death-wound from Sigurd, he asked his slayer what his
name was; but the cunning Sigurd concealed his real name
and mentioned a false one, because he well knew how
potent are the words of a dying man when he curses his
enemy by name.<note place='foot'>F. Kauffmann, <hi rend='italic'>Balder</hi> (Strasburg,
1902), p. 198.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
South and
Central
American
Indians
also keep
their names
secret
from fear
of sorcery.</note>
The Indians of Chiloe, a large island off the southern
coast of Chili, keep their names secret and do not like to
have them uttered aloud; for they say that there are fairies
or imps on the mainland or neighbouring islands who, if
they knew folk's names, would do them an injury; but so
long as they do not know the names, these mischievous
sprites are powerless.<note place='foot'>This I learned from my wife, who
spent some years in Chili and visited
the island of Chiloe.</note> The Araucanians, who inhabit the
mainland of Chili to the north of Chiloe, will hardly ever
tell a stranger their names because they fear that he would
thereby acquire some supernatural power over themselves.
Asked his name by a stranger, who is ignorant of their
superstitions, an Araucanian will answer, <q>I have none.</q><note place='foot'>E. R. Smith, <hi rend='italic'>The Araucanians</hi>
(London, 1855), p. 222.</note>
Names taken from plants, birds, or other natural objects are
bestowed on the Indians of Guiana at their birth by their
parents or the medicine-man, <q>but these names seem of
little use, in that owners have a very strong objection to
telling or using them, apparently on the ground that the
name is part of the man, and that he who knows the name
has part of the owner of that name in his power. To avoid
any danger of spreading knowledge of their names, one
Indian, therefore, generally addresses another only according
to the relationship of the caller and the called, as brother,
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
sister, father, mother, and so on; or, when there is no
relationship, as boy, girl, companion, and so on. These
terms, therefore, practically form the names actually used
by Indians amongst themselves.</q><note place='foot'>E. F. im Thurn, <hi rend='italic'>Among the Indians
of Guiana</hi> (London, 1883), p. 220.</note> Amongst the Indians of
the Goajira peninsula in Colombia it is a punishable offence
to mention a man's name; in aggravated cases heavy compensation
is demanded.<note place='foot'>F. A. Simons, <q>An Exploration
of the Goajira Peninsula, U.S. of
Colombia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the Royal
Geographical Society</hi>, N.S., vii. (1885)
p. 790.</note> The Indians of Darien never tell
their names, and when one of them is asked, <q>What is your
name?</q> he answers, <q>I have none.</q><note place='foot'>Dr. Cullen, <q>The Darien Indians,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the Ethnological Society
of London</hi>, N.S., iv. (1866) p. 265.</note> For example, the
Guami of Panama, <q>like the greater part of the American
Indians, has several names, but that under which he is
known to his relations and friends is never mentioned to a
stranger; according to their ideas a stranger who should learn
a man's name would obtain a secret power over him. As to
the girls, they generally have no name of their own up to the
age of puberty.</q><note place='foot'>A. Pinart, <q>Les Indiens de l'État
de Panama,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue d'Ethnographie</hi>, vi.
(1887) p. 44.</note> Among the Tepehuanes of Mexico a name
is a sacred thing, and they never tell their real native names.<note place='foot'>C. Lumholtz, <hi rend='italic'>Unknown Mexico</hi>, i.
462.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Similar
superstition
as to
personal
names
among the
Indians of
North
America.</note>
In North America superstitions of the same sort are
current. <q>Names bestowed with ceremony in childhood,</q>
says Schoolcraft, <q>are deemed sacred, and are seldom
pronounced, out of respect, it would seem, to the spirits
under whose favour they are supposed to have been selected.
Children are usually called in the family by some name
which can be familiarly used.</q><note place='foot'>H. R. Schoolcraft, <hi rend='italic'>The American
Indians, their History, Condition, and
Prospects</hi> (Buffalo, 1851), p. 213.
Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Oneóta, or Characteristics
of the Red Race of America</hi> (New
York and London, 1845), p. 456.</note> The Navajoes of New
Mexico are most unwilling to reveal their own Indian
names or those of their friends; they generally go by some
Mexican names which they have received from the whites.<note place='foot'>H. R. Schoolcraft, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes</hi>,
iv. 217.</note>
<q>No Apache will give his name to a stranger, fearing some
hidden power may thus be placed in the stranger's hand to
his detriment.</q><note place='foot'>J. G. Bourke, <q>Notes upon the
Religion of the Apache Indians,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>
ii. (1891) p. 423.</note> The Tonkawe Indians of Texas will give
<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>
their children Comanche and English names in addition to
their native names, which they are unwilling to communicate
to others; for they believe that when somebody calls a
person by his or her native name after death the spirit of
the deceased may hear it, and may be prompted to take
revenge on such as disturbed his rest; whereas if the spirit
be called by a name drawn from another language, it will
pay no heed.<note place='foot'>A. S. Galschet, <hi rend='italic'>The Karankawa
Indians, the Coast People of Texas</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Archaeological
and Ethnological Papers of
the Peabody Museum, Harvard University</hi>,
vol. i. No. 2), p. 69.</note> Speaking of the Californian Indians, and
especially of the Nishinam tribe, a well-informed writer
observes: <q>One can very seldom learn an Indian's and
never a squaw's Indian name, though they will tell
their American titles readily enough.... No squaw will
reveal her own name, but she will tell all her neighbors'
that she can think of. For the reason above given
many people believe that half the squaws have no names at
all. So far is this from the truth that every one possesses
at least one and sometimes two or three.</q><note place='foot'>S. Powers, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of California</hi>
(Washington, 1877), p. 315.</note> Blackfoot
Indians believe that they would be unfortunate in all their
undertakings if they were to speak their names.<note place='foot'>G. B. Grinnell, <hi rend='italic'>Blackfoot Lodge
Tales</hi>, p. 194.</note> When
the Canadian Indians were asked their names, they used
to hang their heads in silence or answer that they did not
know.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Relations des Jésuites</hi>, 1633, p. 3
(Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858).</note> When an Ojebway is asked his name, he will look
at some bystander and ask him to answer. <q>This reluctance
arises from an impression they receive when young, that if
they repeat their own names it will prevent their growth,
and they will be small in stature. On account of this
unwillingness to tell their names, many strangers have
fancied that they either have no names or have forgotten
them.</q><note place='foot'>Peter Jones, <hi rend='italic'>History of the Ojebway
Indians</hi>, p. 162. Compare A. P.
Reid, <q>Religious Beliefs of the Ojibois
or Sauteux Indians,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, iii. (1874) p. 107.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sometimes
savages,
though
they will
not utter
their own
names,
do not
object to
other
people's
doing so.</note>
In this last case no scruple seems to be felt about
communicating a man's name to strangers, and no ill effects
appear to be dreaded as a consequence of divulging it; harm
is only done when a name is spoken by its owner. Why is
this? and why in particular should a man be thought to
<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>
stunt his growth by uttering his own name? We may conjecture
that to savages who act and think thus a person's
name only seems to be a part of himself when it is uttered
with his own breath; uttered by the breath of others it has
no vital connexion with him, and no harm can come to him
through it. Whereas, so these primitive philosophers may
have argued, when a man lets his own name pass his lips,
he is parting with a living piece of himself, and if he persists
in so reckless a course he must certainly end by dissipating
his energy and shattering his constitution. Many a broken-down
debauchee, many a feeble frame wasted with disease,
may have been pointed out by these simple moralists to
their awe-struck disciples as a fearful example of the fate
that must sooner or later overtake the profligate who indulges
immoderately in the seductive habit of mentioning
his own name.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Men who
will not
mention
their own
names will
yet invite
other
people to
do so for
them.</note>
However we may explain it, the fact is certain that
many a savage evinces the strongest reluctance to pronounce
his own name, while at the same time he makes no objection
at all to other people pronouncing it, and will even invite
them to do so for him in order to satisfy the curiosity of
an inquisitive stranger. Thus in some parts of Madagascar
it is <foreign rend='italic'>fàdy</foreign> or taboo for a person to tell his own name, but a
slave or attendant will answer for him.<note place='foot'>J. Sibree, <hi rend='italic'>The Great African
Island</hi> (London, 1880), p. 289.</note> <q>Chatting with an
old Sakalava while the men were packing up, we happened
to ask him his name; whereupon he politely requested us
to ask one of his servants standing by. On expressing our
astonishment that he should have forgotten this, he told us
that it was <foreign rend='italic'>fàdy</foreign> (tabooed) for one of his tribe to pronounce
his own name. We found this was perfectly true in that
district, but it is not the case with the Sakalava a few days
farther down the river.</q><note place='foot'>H. W. Grainge, <q>Journal of a
Visit to Mojanga on the North-West
Coast,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Antananarivo Annual and
Madagascar Magazine</hi>, No. i. p. 25
(reprint of the first four numbers,
Antananarivo and London, 1885).</note> The same curious inconsistency,
as it may seem to us, is recorded of some tribes of American
Indians. Thus we are told that <q>the name of an American
Indian is a sacred thing, not to be divulged by the owner
himself without due consideration. One may ask a warrior
<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>
of any tribe to give his name, and the question will be met
with either a point-blank refusal or the more diplomatic
evasion that he cannot understand what is wanted of him.
The moment a friend approaches, the warrior first interrogated
will whisper what is wanted, and the friend can tell
the name, receiving a reciprocation of the courtesy from
the other.</q><note place='foot'>J. G. Bourke, <q>Medicine-men of
the Apaches,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Ninth Annual Report of
the Bureau of Ethnology</hi> (Washington,
1892), p. 461.</note> This general statement applies, for example,
to the Indian tribes of British Columbia, as to whom it is
said that <q>one of their strangest prejudices, which appears
to pervade all tribes alike, is a dislike to telling their names&mdash;thus
you never get a man's right name from himself;
but they will tell each other's names without hesitation.</q><note place='foot'>R. C. Mayne, <hi rend='italic'>Four Years in
British Columbia and Vancouver
Island</hi> (London, 1862), pp. 278 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Though it is considered very rude for a stranger to ask an
Apache his name, and the Apache will never mention it himself,
he will allow his friend at his side to mention it for him.<note place='foot'>J. G. Bourke, <hi rend='italic'>On the Border with
Crook</hi>, pp. 131 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
The Abipones of South America thought it a sin in a man to
utter his own name, but they would tell each other's names
freely; when Father Dobrizhoffer asked a stranger Indian his
name, the man would nudge his neighbour with his elbow
as a sign that his companion should answer the question.<note place='foot'>M. Dobrizhoffer, <hi rend='italic'>Historia de Abiponibus</hi>
(Vienna, 1784), ii. 498.</note>
Some of the Malemut Esquimaux of Bering Strait dislike
very much to pronounce their own names; if a man be
asked his name he will appear confused and will generally
turn to a bystander, and request him to mention it for him.<note place='foot'>E. W. Nelson, <q>The Eskimo
about Bering Strait,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Eighteenth Annual
Report of the Bureau of American
Ethnology</hi>, part i. (Washington, 1899)
p. 289.</note>
In the whole of the East Indian Archipelago the etiquette
is the same. As a general rule no one will utter his own
name. To enquire, <q>What is your name?</q> is a very indelicate
question in native society. When in the course of
administrative or judicial business a native is asked his name,
instead of replying he will look at his comrade to indicate
that he is to answer for him, or he will say straight out,
<q>Ask him.</q> The superstition is current all over the East
Indies without exception,<note place='foot'>G. A. Wilken, <hi rend='italic'>Handleiding voor de
vergelijkende Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>, p. 221. Compare J.
H. F. Kohlbrugge, <q>Naamgeving in
Insulinde,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de Taal-
Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>,
lii. (1901) pp. 172 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
The custom is reported for the British
settlements in the Straits of Malacca
by T. J. Newbold (<hi rend='italic'>Political and Statistical
Account of the British Settlements
in the Straits of Malacca</hi>, London,
1839, ii. 176); for Sumatra in general
by W. Marsden (<hi rend='italic'>History of Sumatra</hi>,
pp. 286 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>), and A. L. van Hasselt
(<hi rend='italic'>Volksbeschrijving van Midden-Sumatra</hi>,
p. 271); for the Battas by Baron
van Hoëvell (<q>Iets over 't oorlogvoeren
der Batta's,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch
Indië</hi>, N.S., vii. (1878) p.
436, note); for the Dyaks by C. Hupe
(<q>Korte Verhandeling over de Godsdienst,
Zeden, enz. der Dajakkers,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Neêrlands Indië</hi>, 1846,
dl. iii. p. 250), and W. H. Furness
(<hi rend='italic'>Home-life of Borneo Head-hunters</hi>,
Philadelphia, 1902, p. 16); for the
island of Sumba by S. Roos (<q>Bijdrage
tot de Kennis van Taal, Land en
Volk op het Eiland Soemba,</q> p. 70,
<hi rend='italic'>Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch
Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen</hi>,
xxxvi.); and for Bolang Mongondo,
in the west of Celebes, by N. P.
Wilken and J. A. Schwarz (<q>Allerlei
over het land en volk van Bolaang
Mongondou,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege
het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xi. (1867) p. 356).</note> and it is found also among the
<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>
Motu and Motumotu tribes of British New Guinea,<note place='foot'>J. Chalmers, <hi rend='italic'>Pioneering in New
Guinea</hi>, p. 187. If a Motumotu man
is hard pressed for his name and there
is nobody near to help him, he will at
last in a very stupid way mention it
himself.</note> the
Papuans of Finsch Haven in German New Guinea,<note place='foot'>O. Schellong, <q>Über Familienleben
und Gebräuche der Papuas der
Umgebung von Finschhafen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
für Ethnologie</hi>, xxi. (1889) p.
12. Compare M. Krieger, <hi rend='italic'>Neu Guinea</hi>
(Berlin, 1899), p. 172.</note> the
Nufoors of Dutch New Guinea,<note place='foot'>Th. J. F. van Hasselt, <q>Gebruik
van vermomde Taal door de Nufooren,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land-
en Volkenkunde</hi>, xlv. (1902) p. 279.
The Nufoors are a Papuan tribe on
Doreh Bay, in Dutch New Guinea.
See <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, in <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>, xlvi.
(1903) p. 287.</note> and the Melanesians of the
Bismarck Archipelago.<note place='foot'>J. Graf Pfeil, <hi rend='italic'>Studien und Beobachtungen
aus der Südsee</hi> (Brunswick,
1899), p. 78; P. A. Kleintitschen,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Küstenbewohner der Gazellehalbinsel</hi>
(Hiltrup bei Münster, preface
dated Christmas, 1906), pp. 237 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among many tribes of South
Africa men and women never mention their names if they
can get any one else to do it for them, but they do not
absolutely refuse when it cannot be avoided.<note place='foot'>J. Macdonald, <q>Manners, Customs,
Superstitions, and Religions of South
African Tribes,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xx. (1891) p. 131.</note> No Warua
will tell his name, but he does not object to being addressed
by it.<note place='foot'>V. L. Cameron, <hi rend='italic'>Across Africa</hi>
(London, 1877), ii. 61.</note> Among the Masai, <q>when a man is called or spoken
to, he is addressed by his father's name, and his own name
is only used when speaking to his mother. It is considered
unlucky for a man to be addressed by name. The methods
employed in finding out what an individual is called seem
apt to lead to confusion. If a man is asked his name, he
replies by giving that of his father, and to arrive at his own
<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>
name it is necessary to ask a third person, or to ask him
what is the name of his mother. There is no objection to
another person mentioning his name even in his presence.</q><note place='foot'>S. L. Hinde and H. Hinde, <hi rend='italic'>The
Last of the Masai</hi> (London, 1901),
pp. 48 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare Sir H. Johnston,
<hi rend='italic'>The Uganda Protectorate</hi> (London,
1902), ii. 826 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; M. Merker, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Masai</hi> (Berlin, 1904), p. 56.</note>
We are told that the Wanyamwesi almost always address
each other as <q>Mate</q> or <q>Friend,</q> and a man sometimes
quite forgets his own name and has to be reminded of it by
another.<note place='foot'>P. Reichard, <q>Die Wanjamuesi,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft für Erdkunde
zu Berlin</hi>, xxiv. (1889) p. 258.</note> The writer who makes this statement was probably
unaware of the reluctance of many savages to utter
their own names, and hence he mistook that reluctance for
forgetfulness. In Uganda no one will mention his totem.
If it is necessary that it should be known, he will ask a
bystander to mention it for him.<note place='foot'>J. Roscoe, <q>Further Notes on the
Manners and Customs of the Baganda,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxii. (1902) p. 29.</note> The Ba-Lua in the
Congo region are unwilling to pronounce the name of
their tribe; if they are pressed on the subject, they will
call on some foreigner to give the required information.<note place='foot'>E. Torday and T. A. Joyce,
<q>Note on the Southern Ba-Mbala,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Man</hi>, vii. (1907) p. 81.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sometimes
the prohibition
to
mention
personal
names
is not
permanent
but temporary
and
contingent.</note>
Sometimes the embargo laid on personal names is not
permanent; it is conditional on circumstances, and when
these change it ceases to operate. Thus when the Nandi
men are away on a foray, nobody at home may pronounce
the names of the absent warriors; they must be referred to
as birds. Should a child so far forget itself as to mention
one of the distant ones by name, the mother would rebuke
it, saying, <q>Don't talk of the birds who are in the heavens.</q><note place='foot'>A. C. Hollis, <hi rend='italic'>The Nandi</hi>, p.
43.</note>
Among the Bangala of the Upper Congo, while a man is
fishing and when he returns with his catch, his proper name
is in abeyance and nobody may mention it. Whatever the
fisherman's real name may be, he is called <foreign rend='italic'>mwele</foreign> without
distinction. The reason is that the river is full of spirits,
who, if they heard the fisherman's real name, might so work
against him that he would catch little or nothing. Even
when he has caught his fish and landed with them, the buyer
must still not address him by his proper name, but must
only call him <foreign rend='italic'>mwele</foreign>; for even then, if the spirits were to
<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>
hear his proper name, they would either bear it in mind and
serve him out another day, or they might so mar the fish he
had caught that he would get very little for them. Hence
the fisherman can extract heavy damages from anybody who
mentions his name, or can compel the thoughtless speaker to
relieve him of the fish at a good price so as to restore his
luck.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. H. Weeks, <q>Anthropological
Notes on the Bangala of the
Upper Congo River,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxix. (1909)
pp. 128, 459.</note> When the Sulka of New Britain are near the territory
of their enemies the Gaktei, they take care not to mention
them by their proper name, believing that were they to do so,
their foes would attack and slay them. Hence in these
circumstances they speak of the Gaktei as <foreign rend='italic'>o lapsiek</foreign>, that is,
<q>the rotten tree-trunks,</q> and they imagine that by calling them
that they make the limbs of their dreaded enemies ponderous
and clumsy like logs.<note place='foot'>R. Parkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Dreissig Jahre in
der Südsee</hi>, p. 198.</note> This example illustrates the extremely
materialistic view which these savages take of the
nature of words; they suppose that the mere utterance of
an expression signifying clumsiness will homoeopathically
affect with clumsiness the limbs of their distant foemen.
Another illustration of this curious misconception is furnished
by a Caffre superstition that the character of a young thief
can be reformed by shouting his name over a boiling kettle
of medicated water, then clapping a lid on the kettle and
leaving the name to steep in the water for several days.
It is not in the least necessary that the thief should be
aware of the use that is being made of his name behind his
back; the moral reformation will be effected without his
knowledge.<note place='foot'>Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>Savage Childhood</hi>,
p. 73.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>In order to
avoid the
use of
people's
own
names,
parents are
sometimes
named
after their
children,
uncles and
aunts after
their
nephews
and nieces,
and so
forth. The
common
custom of
naming
parents
after their
children
seems to
arise from
a reluctance
to
mention
the real
names of
persons
addressed
or directly
referred to.</note>
When it is deemed necessary that a man's real name
should be kept secret, it is often customary, as we have seen,
to call him by a surname or nickname. As distinguished
from the real or primary names, these secondary names are
apparently held to be no part of the man himself, so that
they may be freely used and divulged to everybody without
endangering his safety thereby. Sometimes in order to
avoid the use of his own name a man will be called after
his child. Thus we are informed that <q>the Gippsland
<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>
blacks objected strongly to let any one outside the tribe
know their names, lest their enemies, learning them, should
make them vehicles of incantation, and so charm their lives
away. As children were not thought to have enemies, they
used to speak of a man as <q>the father, uncle, or cousin of
So-and-so,</q> naming a child; but on all occasions abstained from
mentioning the name of a grown-up person.</q><note place='foot'>E. M. Curr, <hi rend='italic'>The Australian Race</hi>,
iii. 545. Similarly among the Dacotas
<q>there is no secrecy in children's
names, but when they grow up there
is a secrecy in men's names</q> (H. R.
Schoolcraft, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes</hi>, iii. 240).</note> Similarly
among the Nufoors of Dutch New Guinea, grown-up persons
who are related by marriage may not mention each other's
names, but it is lawful to mention the names of children;
hence in order to designate a person whose name they may
not pronounce they will speak of him or her as the father or
mother of So-and-so.<note place='foot'>Th. J. F. van Hasselt, <q>Gebruik
van vermomde Taal door de Nufooren,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land-
en Volkenkunde</hi>, xlv. (1902) p. 278.</note> The Alfoors of Poso, in Celebes,
will not pronounce their own names. Among them, accordingly,
if you wish to ascertain a person's name, you ought
not to ask the man himself, but should enquire of others.
But if this is impossible, for example, when there is no one
else near, you should ask him his child's name, and then
address him as the <q>Father of So-and-so.</q> Nay, these Alfoors
are shy of uttering the names even of children; so when a
boy or girl has a nephew or niece, he or she is addressed
as <q>Uncle of So-and-so,</q> or <q>Aunt of So-and-so.</q><note place='foot'>A. C. Kruijt, <q>Een en ander aangaande
het geestelijk en maatschappelijk
leven van den Poso-Alfoer,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xl. (1896) pp. 273 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In pure
Malay society, we are told, a man is never asked his name,
and the custom of naming parents after their children is
adopted only as a means of avoiding the use of the parents'
own names. The writer who makes this statement adds
in confirmation of it that childless persons are named after
their younger brothers.<note place='foot'>G. Mansveld (Kontroleur van
Nias), <q>Iets over de namen en Galars
onder de Maleijers in de Padangsche
Bovenlanden, bepaaldelijk in noordelijk
Agam,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>, xxiii.
(1876) pp. 443, 449.</note> Among the land Dyaks of
northern Borneo children as they grow up are called,
according to their sex, the father or mother of a child of
their father's or mother's younger brother, or sister,<note place='foot'>Spenser St. John, <hi rend='italic'>Life in the Forests
of the Far East</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. 208.</note> that is,
<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>
they are called the father or mother of what we should
call their first cousin. The Caffres used to think it discourteous
to call a bride by her own name, so they would
call her <q>the Mother of So-and-so,</q> even when she was only
betrothed, far less a wife and a mother.<note place='foot'>Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>The Essential Kafir</hi>,
p. 202.</note> Among the Kukis
and Zemis or Kacha Nagas of Assam parents drop their
own names after the birth of a child and are named Father
and Mother of So-and-so. Childless couples go by the
names of <q>the childless father,</q> <q>the childless mother,</q> <q>the
father of no child,</q> <q>the mother of no child.</q><note place='foot'>L. A. Waddell, <q>The Tribes of
the Brahmapootra Valley,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Asiatic Society of Bengal</hi>, lxix. part
iii. (1901) pp. 52, 69, compare 46.</note> A Zulu
woman may not utter her husband's name; if she speaks to
or of him she says, <q>Father of So-and-so,</q> mentioning the
name of one of his children.<note place='foot'>H. Callaway, <hi rend='italic'>Religious System of
the Amazulu</hi>, part iii. p. 316, note.</note> A Hindoo woman will not
name her husband. If she has to refer to him she will
designate him as the father of her child or by some other
periphrasis.<note place='foot'>W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion and
Folk-lore of Northern India</hi> (Westminster,
1896), ii. 5 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Tribes and Castes of the North-Western
Provinces and Oudh</hi>, ii. 251.</note> The widespread custom of naming a father
after his child has sometimes been supposed to spring from
a desire on the father's part to assert his paternity, apparently
as a means of obtaining those rights over his children
which had previously, under a system of mother-kin, been
possessed by the mother.<note place='foot'>G. A. Wilken, <hi rend='italic'>Handleiding voor
de vergelijkende Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>,
pp. 216-219; E. B.
Tylor, <q>On a Method of Investigating
the Developement of Institutions,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xviii. (1889) pp. 248-250 (who refers
to a series of papers by G. A. Wilken,
<q>Over de primitieve vormen van het
huwelijk,</q> published in <hi rend='italic'>Indische Gids</hi>,
1880, etc., which I have not seen).
Wilken's theory is rejected by Mr.
A. C. Kruijt (<hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>), who explains the
custom by the fear of attracting the
attention of evil spirits to the person
named. Other explanations are suggested
by Mr. J. H. F. Kohlbrugge
(<q>Naamgeving in Insulinde,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde
van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>, lii.
(1901) pp. 160-170), and by Mr. E.
Crawley (<hi rend='italic'>The Mystic Rose</hi>, London,
1902, pp. 428-433).</note> But this explanation does not
account for the parallel custom of naming the mother after
her child, which seems commonly to co-exist with the
practice of naming the father after the child. Still less, if
possible, does it apply to the customs of calling childless
couples the father and mother of children which do not
exist, of naming people after their younger brothers, and of
<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>
designating children as the uncles and aunts of So-and-so,
or as the fathers and mothers of their first cousins. But
all these practices are explained in a simple and natural
way if we suppose that they originate in a reluctance
to utter the real names of persons addressed or directly
referred to. That reluctance is probably based partly on a
fear of attracting the notice of evil spirits, partly on a dread
of revealing the name to sorcerers, who would thereby obtain
a handle for injuring the owner of the name.<note place='foot'>For evidence of the custom of
naming parents after their children in
Australia, see E. J. Eyre, <hi rend='italic'>Journals of
Expeditions of Discovery into Central
Australia</hi> (London, 1845), ii. 325 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>:
in Sumatra, see W. Marsden, <hi rend='italic'>History
of Sumatra</hi>, p. 286; Baron van Hoëvell,
<q>Iets over 't oorlogvoeren der
Batta's,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>,
N.S. vii. (1878) p. 436, note;
A. L. van Hasselt, <hi rend='italic'>Volksbeschrijving van
Midden-Sumatra</hi>, p. 274: in Nias, see
J. T. Nieuwenhuisen en H. C. B. von
Rosenberg, <hi rend='italic'>Verslag omtrent het eiland
Nias</hi>, p. 28 (<hi rend='italic'>Verhandelingen van het
Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten
en Wetenschappen</hi>, xxx. Batavia, 1863):
in Java, see P. J. Veth, <hi rend='italic'>Java</hi>, i. (Haarlem,
1875) p. 642; J. H. F. Kohlbrugge,
<q>Die Tenggeresen, ein alter
Javanischen Volksstamm,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van
Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>, liii. (1901) p. 121;
in Borneo, see C. Hupe, <q>Korte Verhandeling
over de Godsdienst, Zeden,
enz. der Dajakkers,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor
Neêrlands Indië</hi>, 1846, dl. iii. p. 249;
H. Low, <hi rend='italic'>Sarawak</hi>, p. 249; Spenser
St. John, <hi rend='italic'>Life in the Forests of the Far
East</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. 208; M. T. H. Perelaer,
<hi rend='italic'>Ethnographische Beschrijving der Dajaks</hi>,
p. 42; C. Hose, <q>The Natives
of Borneo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxiii. (1894) p. 170;
W. H. Furness, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore in Borneo</hi>
(Wallingford, Pennsylvania, 1899,
privately printed), p. 26; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Home-life
of Borneo Head-hunters</hi>, pp. 17 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
55; A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>Quer durch
Borneo</hi>, i. 75: among the Mantras of
Malacca, see W. W. Skeat and C. O.
Blagden, <hi rend='italic'>Pagan Races of the Malay
Peninsula</hi>, ii. 16 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>: among the
Negritos of Zambales in the Philippines,
see W. A. Reed, <hi rend='italic'>Negritos of
Zambales</hi> (Manilla, 1904), p. 55:
in the islands between Celebes and
New Guinea, see J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De
sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen
Selebes en Papua</hi>, pp. 5, 137, 152 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
238, 260, 353, 392, 418, 450; J. H.
W. van der Miesen, <q>Een en ander
over Boeroe,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege
het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xlvi. (1902) p. 444; in Celebes and
other parts of the Indian Archipelago,
see J. H. F. Kohlbrugge, <q>Naamgeving
in Insulinde,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van
Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>, lii. (1901) pp.
160-170; G. A. Wilken, <hi rend='italic'>Handleiding
voor de vergelijkende Volkenkunde
van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>, pp.
216 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>: in New Guinea, see P. W.
Schmidt, <q>Ethnographisches von Berlinhafen,
Deutsch-Neu-Guinea,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen
der Anthropologischen
Gesellschaft in Wien</hi>, xxx. (1899) p.
28: among the Kasias of North-eastern
India, see Col. H. Yule, in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Anthropological Institute</hi>, ix. (1880)
p. 298; L. A. Waddell, <q>The Tribes
of the Brahmaputra Valley,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</hi>, lxix.
part iii. (Calcutta, 1901) p. 46: among
some of the indigenous races of southern
China, see P. Vial, <q>Les Gni ou Gnipa,
tribu Lolote du Yun-Nan,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Missions
Catholiques</hi>, xxv. (1893) p. 270; <hi rend='italic'>La
Mission lyonnaise d'exploration commerciale
en Chine</hi> (Lyons, 1898), p.
369: in Corea, see Mrs. Bishop, <hi rend='italic'>Korea
and her Neighbours</hi> (London, 1898), i.
136: among the Yukagirs of north-eastern
Asia, see W. Jochelson, <q>Die
Jukagiren im äussersten Nordosten
Asiens,</q> xvii. <hi rend='italic'>Jahresbericht der Geographischen
Gesellschaft von Bern</hi> (Bern,
1900), pp. 26 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; P. von Stenin,
<q>Jochelson's Forschungen unter den
Jukagiren,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxxvi. (1899) p.
169: among the Masai, see M.
Merker, <hi rend='italic'>Die Masai</hi> (Berlin, 1904),
pp. 59, 235: among the Bechuanas,
Basutos, and other Caffre tribes of
South Africa, see D. Livingston, <hi rend='italic'>Missionary
Travels and Researches in
South Africa</hi> (London, 1857), p. 126;
J. Shooter, <hi rend='italic'>The Kafirs of Natal</hi> (London,
1857), pp. 220 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; D. Leslie,
<hi rend='italic'>Among the Zulus and Amatongas</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Edinburgh, 1875), pp. 171 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; G.
M'Call Theal, <hi rend='italic'>Kaffir Folk-lore</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (London,
1886), p. 225; Father Porte,
<q>Les reminiscences d'un missionaire
du Basutoland,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Missions Catholiques</hi>,
xxviii. (1896) p. 300: among the
Hos of Togoland in West Africa, see
J. Spieth, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ewe-Stāmme</hi>, p. 217:
among the Patagonians, see G. C.
Musters, <hi rend='italic'>At Home with the Patagonians</hi>
(London, 1871), p. 177: among the
Lengua Indians of the Gran Chaco, see
G. Kurze, <q>Sitten und Gebräuche der
Lengua-Indianer,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen der
Geographischen Gesellschaft zu Jena</hi>,
xxiii. (1905) p. 28: among the Mayas
of Guatemala, see H. H. Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>Native
Races of the Pacific States</hi>, ii. 680:
among the Haida Indians of Queen
Charlotte Islands, see J. R. Swanton,
<q>Contributions to the Ethnology of
the Haida,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Memoir of the American
Museum of Natural History, The Jesup
North Pacific Expedition</hi>, vol. v. part i.
(Leyden and New York, 1905) p. 118:
and among the Tinneh and occasionally
the Thlinkeet Indians of north-west
America, see E. Petitot, <hi rend='italic'>Monographie
des Dènè-Dindjié</hi> (Paris, 1876),
p. 61; H. J. Holmberg, <q>Ethnographische
Skizzen über die Völker des
russischen Amerika,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Acta Societatis
Scientiarum Fennicae</hi>, iv. (1856) p. 319.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. Names of Relations tabooed.'/>
<head>§ 2. Names of Relations tabooed.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The names
of persons
related to
the speaker
by blood
and especially
by
marriage
may often
not be
mentioned.
Women's
speech
among the
Caffres.</note>
It might naturally be expected that the reserve so
commonly maintained with regard to personal names would
be dropped or at least relaxed among relations and friends.
But the reverse of this is often the case. It is precisely the
persons most intimately connected by blood and especially
by marriage to whom the rule applies with the greatest
stringency. Such people are often forbidden, not only to
pronounce each other's names, but even to utter ordinary
words which resemble or have a single syllable in common
with these names. The persons who are thus mutually
debarred from mentioning each other's names are especially
husbands and wives, a man and his wife's parents, and a
woman and her husband's father. For example, among the
Caffres of South Africa a woman may not publicly pronounce
the birth-name of her husband or of any of his brothers, nor
may she use the interdicted word in its ordinary sense. If
her husband, for instance, be called u-Mpaka, from <foreign rend='italic'>impaka</foreign>,
a small feline animal, she must speak of that beast by some
other name.<note place='foot'>J. Shooter, <hi rend='italic'>The Kafirs of Natal</hi>
(London, 1857), p. 221.</note> Further, a Caffre wife is forbidden to pronounce
<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>
even mentally the names of her father-in-law and of
all her husband's male relations in the ascending line; and
whenever the emphatic syllable of any of their names occurs
in another word, she must avoid it by substituting either an
entirely new word, or, at least, another syllable in its place.
Hence this custom has given rise to an almost distinct
language among the women, which the Caffres call <foreign rend='italic'>Ukuteta
Kwabafazi</foreign> or <q>women's speech.</q><note place='foot'>Maclean, <hi rend='italic'>Compendium of Kafir
Laws and Customs</hi> (Cape Town, 1866),
pp. 92 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; D. Leslie, <hi rend='italic'>Among the Zulus
and Amatongas</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp. 141 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 172;
M. Kranz, <hi rend='italic'>Natur- und Kulturleben der
Zulus</hi> (Wiesbaden, 1880), pp. 114 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
G. M'Call Theal, <hi rend='italic'>Kaffir Folk-lore</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(London, 1886), p. 214; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Records
of South-Eastern Africa</hi>, vii. 435;
Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>The Essential Kafir</hi>, pp.
236-243; Father Porte, <q>Les reminiscences
d'un missionaire du Basutoland,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Missions Catholiques</hi>, xxviii.
(1896) p. 233.</note> The interpretation of
this <q>women's speech</q> is naturally very difficult, <q>for no
definite rules can be given for the formation of these substituted
words, nor is it possible to form a dictionary of them,
their number being so great&mdash;since there may be many
women, even in the same tribe, who would be no more at
liberty to use the substitutes employed by some others, than
they are to use the original words themselves.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. Francis Fleming, <hi rend='italic'>Kaffraria
and its Inhabitants</hi> (London, 1853),
p. 97; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Southern Africa</hi> (London,
1856), pp. 238 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> This writer states
that the women are forbidden to pronounce
<q>any word which may happen
to contain a sound similar to any one in
the names of their nearest male relatives.</q></note> A Caffre
man, on his side, may not mention the name of his mother-in-law,
nor may she pronounce his; but he is free to utter
words in which the emphatic syllable of her name occurs.<note place='foot'>Maclean, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 93; D.
Leslie, <hi rend='italic'>Among the Zulus and Amatongas</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
pp. 46, 102, 172. The extensive
system of taboos on personal
names among the Caffres is known as
<foreign rend='italic'>Ukuhlonipa</foreign>, or simply <foreign rend='italic'>hlonipa</foreign>. The
fullest account of it with which I am
acquainted is given by Leslie, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
pp. 141 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 172-180. See further
Miss A. Werner, <q>The Custom of
<foreign rend='italic'>Hlonipa</foreign> in its Influence on Language,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the African Society</hi>, No. 15
(April, 1905), pp. 346-356.</note>
In Northern Nyassaland no woman will speak the name of
her husband or even use a word that may be synonymous
with it. If she were to call him by his proper name, she
believes it would be unlucky and would affect her powers of
conception. In like manner women abstain, for superstitious
reasons, from using the common names of articles of food,
which they designate by terms peculiar to themselves.<note place='foot'>Sir H. H. Johnston, <hi rend='italic'>British Central
Africa</hi> (London, 1897), p. 452.</note>
Among the Kondes, at the north-western end of Lake
<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>
Nyassa, a woman may not mention the name of her father-in-law;
indeed she may not even speak to him nor see him.<note place='foot'>A. Merensky, <q>Das Konde-volk
im deutschen Gebiet am Nyassa-See,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft
für Anthropologie, Ethnologie, und
Urgeschichte</hi>, 1893, p. (296).</note>
Among the Barea and Bogos of Eastern Africa a woman
never mentions her husband's name; a Bogo wife would
rather be unfaithful to him than commit the monstrous sin
of allowing his name to pass her lips.<note place='foot'>W. Munzinger, <hi rend='italic'>Ostafrikanische
Studien</hi> (Schaffhausen, 1864), p. 526;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten und Recht der Bogos</hi> (Winterthur,
1859), p. 95.</note> Among the Haussas
<q>the first-born son is never called by his parents by his
name; indeed they will not even speak with him if other
people are present. The same rule holds good of the first
husband and the first wife.</q><note place='foot'>G. A. Krause, <q>Merkwürdige
Sitten der Haussa,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxix.
(1896) p. 375.</note> In antiquity Ionian women
would not call their husbands by their names.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, i. 146.</note> While the
rites of Ceres were being performed in Rome, no one might
name a father or a daughter.<note place='foot'>Servius, on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> iv. 58.</note> Among the South Slavs at
the present day husbands and wives will not mention each
other's names, and a young wife may not call any of her
housemates by their true names; she must invent or at least
adopt other names for them.<note place='foot'>K. Rhamm, <q>Der Verkehr der
Geschlecter unter den Slaven in
seinen gegensätzlichen Erscheinungen,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxxxii. (1902) p. 192.</note> A Kirghiz woman dares not
pronounce the names of the older relations of her husband,
nor even use words which resemble them in sound. For
example, if one of these relations is called Shepherd, she
may not speak of sheep, but must call them <q>the bleating
ones</q>; if his name is Lamb, she must refer to lambs as
<q>the young of the bleating ones.</q><note place='foot'>W. Radloff, <hi rend='italic'>Proben der Volkslitteratur
der türkischen Stämme Süd-Sibiriens</hi>,
iii. (St. Petersburg, 1870)
p. 13, note 3.</note> After marriage an Aino
wife may not mention her husband's name; to do so would
be deemed equivalent to killing him.<note place='foot'>J. Batchelor, <hi rend='italic'>The Ainu and their
Folk-lore</hi> (London, 1901), pp. 226,
249 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 252.</note> Among the Sgaus,
a Karen tribe of Burma, children never mention their
parents' names.<note place='foot'>Bringaud, <q>Les Karins de la
Birmanie,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Missions Catholiques</hi>, xx.
(1888) p. 308.</note> A Toda man may not utter the names of
his mother's brother, his grandfather and grandmother, his
wife's mother, and of the man from whom he has received
<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>
his wife, who is usually the wife's father. All these names
are tabooed to him in the lifetime of the persons who bear
them, and after death the prohibitions are not only maintained
but extended.<note place='foot'>W. H. R. Rivers, <hi rend='italic'>The Todas</hi>, p.
626.</note> In southern India wives believe that
to tell their husband's name or to pronounce it even in a
dream would bring him to an untimely end. Further, they
may not mention the names of their parents, their parents-in-law,
and their brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law.<note place='foot'>E. Thurston, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographic Notes
in Southern India</hi>, p. 533.</note> Among
the Ojebways husbands and wives never mention each other's
names;<note place='foot'>Peter Jones, <hi rend='italic'>History of the Ojebway
Indians</hi>, p. 162.</note> among the Omahas a man and his father-in-law
and mother-in-law will on no account utter each other's
names in company.<note place='foot'>E. James, <hi rend='italic'>Expedition from Pittsburgh
to the Rocky Mountains</hi> (London,
1823), i. 232.</note> A Dacota <q>is not allowed to address
or to look towards his wife's mother, especially, and the
woman is shut off from familiar intercourse with her
husband's father and others, and etiquette prohibits them
from speaking the names of their relatives by marriage.</q>
<q>None of their customs,</q> adds the same writer, <q>is more
tenacious of life than this; and no family law is more
binding.</q><note place='foot'>S. R. Riggs, <hi rend='italic'>Dakota Grammar,
Texts, and Ethnography</hi> (Washington,
1893), p. 204.</note> In the Nishinam tribe of California <q>a husband
never calls his wife by name on any account, and it is said
that divorces have been produced by no other provocation
than that.</q><note place='foot'>S. Powers, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of California</hi>,
p. 315.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Names of
relations,
especially
of persons
related
to the
speaker by
marriage,
may not be
mentioned
in the East
Indies.</note>
The Battas or Bataks of Sumatra display a great aversion
to mentioning their own names and a still greater aversion
to mentioning the names of their parents, grandparents, or
elder blood-relations. Politeness forbids the putting of
direct questions on this subject, so that the investigation of
personal identity becomes difficult and laborious. When a
Batta expects to be questioned as to his relations, he will
usually provide himself with a friend to answer for him.<note place='foot'>Willer, <q>Verzameling der Battasche
Wetten en Instellingen in Mandheling
en Pertibie,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>,
1846, dl. ii. 337 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
A Batak man may never mention the names of his wife, his
daughter-in-law and of his son-in-law; a woman is most
particularly forbidden to mention the name of the man who
<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>
has married her daughter.<note place='foot'>J. H. Meerwaldt, <q>Gebruiken der
Bataks in het maatschappelijk leven,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap</hi>, xlix.
(1905) pp. 123, 125.</note> Among the Karo-Bataks the forbidden
names are those of parents, uncles, aunts, parents-in-law,
brothers and sisters, and especially grandparents.<note place='foot'>J. E. Neumann, <q>Kemali, Pantang
en Rĕboe bij de Karo-Bataks,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land-
en Volkenkunde</hi>, xlviii. (1906) p.
510.</note>
Among the Dyaks a child never pronounces the names of
his parents, and is angry if any one else does so in his presence.
A husband never calls his wife by her name, and she never
calls him by his. If they have children, they name each other
after them, <q>Father of So-and-so</q> and <q>Mother of So-and-so</q>;
if they have no children they use the pronouns <q>he</q> and <q>she,</q>
or an expression such as <q>he or she whom I love</q>; and in
general, members of a Dyak family do not mention each other's
names.<note place='foot'>C. Hupe, <q>Korte Verhandeling
over de Godsdienst, Zeden, enz. der
Dajakkers,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Neêrlands
Indie</hi>, 1846, dl. iii. pp. 249 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Moreover, when the personal names happen also, as
they often do, to be names of common objects, the Dyak is
debarred from designating these objects by their ordinary
names. For instance, if a man or one of his family is called
Bintang, which means <q>star,</q> he must not call a star a star
(<foreign rend='italic'>bintang</foreign>); he must call it a <foreign rend='italic'>pariama</foreign>. If he or a member of
his domestic circle bears the name of Bulan, which means
<q>moon,</q> he may not speak of the moon as the moon
(<foreign rend='italic'>bulan</foreign>); he must call it <foreign rend='italic'>penala</foreign>. Hence it comes about that
in the Dyak language there are two sets of distinct names
for many objects.<note place='foot'><q>De Dajaks op Borneo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xiii. (1869) p. 78;
G. A. Wilken, <hi rend='italic'>Handleiding voor de
vergelijkende Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>,
p. 599.</note> Among the sea Dyaks of Sarawak a
man may not pronounce the name of his father-in-law or
mother-in-law without incurring the wrath of the spirits.
And since he reckons as his father-in-law and mother-in-law
not only the father and mother of his own wife, but also the
fathers and mothers of his brothers' wives and sisters'
husbands, and likewise the fathers and mothers of all his
cousins, the number of tabooed names may be very considerable
and the opportunities of error correspondingly numerous.
To make confusion worse confounded, the names of persons
are often the names of common things, such as moon, bridge,
<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>
barley, cobra, leopard; so that when any of a man's many
fathers-in-law and mothers-in-law are called by such names,
these common words may not pass his lips.<note place='foot'>R. Shelford, <q>Two Medicine-baskets
from Sarawak,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxiii. (1903)
pp. 78 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among the
Dyaks of Landak and Tajan it is forbidden to mention the
names of parents and grandparents, sometimes also of great-grandparents,
whether they are alive or dead.<note place='foot'>M. C. Schadee, <q>Bijdrage tot de
kennis van den godsdienst der Dajaks
van Landak en Tajan,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsche-Indië</hi>,
lvi. (1904) p. 536.</note> Among
the Alfoors or Toradjas of Poso, in central Celebes, you may
not pronounce the names of your father, mother, grandparents,
and other near relations. But the strictest taboo is
on the names of parents-in-law. A son-in-law and a
daughter-in-law may not only never mention the names of
their parents-in-law, but if the names happen to be ordinary
words of the language, they may never allow the words in
their common significance to pass their lips. For example,
if my father is called Njara (<q>horse</q>), I may not speak of
him by that name; but in speaking of the animal I am free
to use the word horse (<foreign rend='italic'>njara</foreign>). But if my father-in-law is
called Njara, the case is different, for then not only may I
not refer to him by his name, but I may not even call a
horse a horse; in speaking of the animal I must use some
other word. The missionary who reports the custom is
acquainted with a man whose mother-in-law rejoices in the
name of Ringgi (<q>rixdollar</q>). When this man has occasion
to refer to real rixdollars, he alludes to them delicately as
<q>large guilders</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>roepia bose</foreign>). Another man may not use
the ordinary word for water (<foreign rend='italic'>oewe</foreign>); in speaking of water he
employs a word (<foreign rend='italic'>owai</foreign>) taken from a different dialect.
Indeed, among these Alfoors it is the common practice in
such cases to replace the forbidden word by a kindred word
of the same significance borrowed from another dialect. In
this way many fresh terms or new forms of an old word pass
into general circulation.<note place='foot'>A. C. Kruijt, <q>Een en ander aangaande
het geestelijk en maatschappelijk
leven van den Poso-Alfoer,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xl. (1896) pp. 273 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
The word for taboo among these people
is <hi rend='italic'>kapali</hi>. See further A. C. Kruijt,
<q>Eenige ethnographische aanteekeningen
omtrent de Toboengkoe en
Tomori,</q> <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> xliv. (1900) pp. 219,
237.</note> Among the Alfoors of Minahassa,
<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>
in northern Celebes, the custom is carried still further so as
to forbid the use even of words which merely resemble the
personal names in sound. It is especially the name of a
father-in-law which is thus laid under an interdict. If he,
for example, is called Kalala, his son-in-law may not speak
of a horse by its common name <foreign rend='italic'>kawalo</foreign>; he must call it a
<q>riding-beast</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>sasakajan</foreign>).<note place='foot'>G. A. Wilken, <hi rend='italic'>Handleiding voor de
vergelijkende Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>,
pp. 599 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> So among the Alfoors of the
island of Buru it is taboo to mention the names of parents
and parents-in-law, or even to speak of common objects by
words which resemble these names in sound. Thus, if your
mother-in-law is called Dalu, which means <q>betel,</q> you may
not ask for betel by its ordinary name, you must ask for
<q>red mouth</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>mue miha</foreign>); if you want betel-leaf, you may
not say betel-leaf (<foreign rend='italic'>dalu 'mun</foreign>), you must say <foreign rend='italic'>karon fenna</foreign>.
In the same island it is also taboo to mention the name of
an elder brother in his presence.<note place='foot'>G. A. Wilken, <q>Bijdrage tot de
Kennis der Alfoeren van het Eiland
Boeroe,</q> p. 26 (<hi rend='italic'>Verhandelingen van
het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten
en Wetenschappen</hi>, xxxvi.). The
words for taboo among these Alfoors
are <foreign rend='italic'>poto</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>koin</foreign>; <foreign rend='italic'>poto</foreign> applies to
actions, <foreign rend='italic'>koin</foreign> to things and places.
The literal meaning of <foreign rend='italic'>poto</foreign> is <q>warm,</q>
<q>hot</q> (Wilken, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 25).</note> Transgressions of these
rules are punished with fines.<note place='foot'>J. H. W. van der Miesen, <q>Een
en ander over Boeroe,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xlvi. (1902) p. 455.</note> In Bolang Mongondo, a
district in the west of Celebes, the unmentionable names are
those of parents, parents-in-law, uncles and aunts.<note place='foot'>N. P. Wilken and J. A. Schwarz,
<q>Allerlei over het Land en Volk van
Bolaang Mongondou,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xi. (1867) p. 356.</note> Among
the Alfoors of Halmahera a son-in-law may never use his
father-in-law's name in speaking to him; he must simply
address him as <q>Father-in-law.</q><note place='foot'>C. F. H. Campen, <q>De godsdienstbegrippen
der Halmaherasche
Alfoeren,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>, xxvii.
(1882) p. 450.</note> In Sunda it is thought
that a particular crop would be spoilt if a man were to
mention the names of his father and mother.<note place='foot'>K. F. Holle, <q>Snippers van den
Regent van Galoeh,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor
Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>,
xxvii. (1882) pp. 101 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The precise
consequence supposed to follow is that
the <foreign rend='italic'>oebi</foreign> (?) plantations would have no
bulbs (<foreign rend='italic'>geen knollen</foreign>). The names of
several animals are also tabooed in
Sunda. See below, p. <ref target='Pg415'>415</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Names of
persons
related by
marriage
to the
speaker are
tabooed in
New
Guinea.</note>
Among the Nufoors, as we have seen,<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref>.</note> persons who are
related to each other by marriage are forbidden to mention
<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>
each other's names. Among the connexions whose names
are thus tabooed are wife, mother-in-law, father-in-law, your
wife's uncles and aunts and also her grand-uncles and grand-aunts,
and the whole of your wife's or your husband's family
in the same generation as yourself, except that men may
mention the names of their brothers-in-law, though women
may not. The taboo comes into operation as soon as the
betrothal has taken place and before the marriage has been
celebrated. Families thus connected by the betrothal of two
of their members are not only forbidden to pronounce each
other's names; they may not even look at each other, and
the rule gives rise to the most comical scenes when they
happen to meet unexpectedly. And not merely the names
themselves, but any words that sound like them are scrupulously
avoided and other words used in their place. If it
should chance that a person has inadvertently uttered a
forbidden name, he must at once throw himself on the floor
and say, <q>I have mentioned a wrong name. I throw it
through the chinks of the floor in order that I may
eat well.</q><note place='foot'>Th. J. F. van Hasselt, <q>Gebruik
van vermomde Taal door de Nufooren,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land-
en Volkenkunde</hi>, xlv. (1902) pp. 278 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
The writer explains that <q>to eat well</q>
is a phrase used in the sense of <q>to be
decent, well-behaved,</q> <q>to know what
is customary.</q></note> In German New Guinea near relations by
marriage, particularly father-in-law and daughter-in-law,
mother-in-law and son-in-law, as well as brothers-in-law
and sisters-in-law, must see as little of each other as possible;
they may not converse together and they may not mention
each other's names, not even when these names have passed
to younger members of the family. Thus if a child is called
after its deceased paternal grandfather, the mother may not
call her child by its name but must employ another name
for the purpose.<note place='foot'>M. Krieger, <hi rend='italic'>Neu-Guinea</hi>, pp.
171 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among the Yabim, for example, on the
south-east coast of German New Guinea, parents-in-law may
neither be touched nor named. Even when their names are
borne by other people or are the ordinary names of common
objects, they may not pass the lips of their sons-in-law and
daughters-in-law.<note place='foot'>K. Vetter, in <hi rend='italic'>Nachrichten über
Kaiser Wilhelms-Land und den
Bismarck-Archipel</hi>, 1897, p. 92. For
more evidence of the observance of this
custom in German New Guinea see
O. Schellong, <q>Über Familienleben
und Gebräuche der Papuas der Umgebung
von Finschhafen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für
Ethnologie</hi>, xxi. (1889) p. 12; M. J.
Erdweg, <q>Die Bewohner der Insel
Tumleo, Berlinhafen, Deutsch-Neu-Guinea,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen der Anthropologischen
Gesellschaft in Wien</hi>, xxxii.
(1902) pp. 379 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among the western tribes of British New
<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>
Guinea the principal taboo or <foreign rend='italic'>sabi</foreign>, as it is there called,
concerns the names of relatives by marriage. A man may
not mention the name of his wife's father, mother, elder
sister, or elder brother, nor the name of any male or female
relative of her father or mother, so long as the relative in
question is a member of the same tribe as the speaker. The
names of his wife's younger brothers and sisters are not
tabooed to him. The same law applies to a woman with
reference to the names of her husband's relatives. As a
general rule, this taboo does not extend outside the tribal
boundaries. Hence when a man or woman marries out of
his or her tribe, the taboo is usually not applied. And when
members of one tribe, who may not pronounce each other's
names at home, are away from their own territory, they are
no longer strictly bound to observe the prohibition. A
breach of the taboo has to be atoned for by the offender
paying a fine to the person whose name he has taken in
vain. Until that has been done, neither of the parties
concerned, if they are males, may enter the men's club-house.
In the old times the offended party might recover
his social standing by cutting off somebody else's head.<note place='foot'>B. A. Hely, <q>Notes on Totemism,
etc., among the Western Tribes,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>British New Guinea, Annual Report
for 1894-95</hi>, pp. 54 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare
M. Krieger, <hi rend='italic'>Neu-Guinea</hi>, pp. 313
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Names of
persons
related by
marriage
to the
speaker are
tabooed in
Melanesia.</note>
In the western islands of Torres Straits a man never
mentioned the personal names of his father-in-law, mother-in-law,
brother-in-law, and sister-in-law; and a woman was
subject to the same restrictions. A brother-in-law might be
spoken of as the husband or brother of some one whose
name it was lawful to mention; and similarly a sister-in-law
might be called the wife of So-and-so. If a man by chance
used the personal name of his brother-in-law, he was
ashamed and hung his head. His shame was only relieved
when he had made a present as compensation to the man
whose name he had taken in vain. The same compensation
was made to a sister-in-law, a father-in-law, and a mother-in-law
for the accidental mention of their names. This
<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>
disability to use the personal names of relatives by marriage
was associated with the custom, so common throughout the
world, that a man or woman is not allowed to speak to these
relatives. If a man wished to communicate with his father-in-law
or mother-in-law, he spoke to his wife and she spoke
to her parent. When direct communication became absolutely
necessary, it was said that a man might talk to his father-in-law
or mother-in-law a very little in a low voice. The
behaviour towards a brother-in-law was the same.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological
Expedition to Torres Straits</hi>, v.
142 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Similar
taboos on the names of persons connected by marriage are
in force in New Britain and New Ireland.<note place='foot'>Dr. Hahl, <q>Über die Rechtsanschauungen
der Eingeborenen eines
Teiles der Blanchebucht und des
Innern der Gazelle Halbinsel,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Nachrichten
über Kaiser Wilhelms-Land
und den Bismarck-Archipel</hi>, 1897,
p. 80; O. Schellong, in <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für
Ethnologie</hi>, xxi. (1889) p. 12.</note> Among the
natives who inhabit the coast of the Gazelle Peninsula in
New Britain to mention the name of a brother-in-law is the
grossest possible affront you can offer to him; it is a crime
punishable with death.<note place='foot'>P. A. Kleintitschen, <hi rend='italic'>Die Küstenbewohner
der Gazellehalbinsel</hi>, pp. 190,
238.</note> In the Santa Cruz and Reef
Islands a man is forbidden to pronounce the name of his
mother-in-law, and he may never see her face so long as he
lives. She on her side lies under similar restrictions in
regard to him. Further, a man is prohibited from mentioning
the name of his son-in-law, though he is allowed to
look at him. And if a husband has paid money for his wife
to several men, none of these men may ever utter his name
or look him in the face. If one of them did by chance
look at him, the offended husband would destroy some
of the offender's property.<note place='foot'>Rev. W. O'Ferrall, <q>Native Stories
from Santa Cruz and Reef Islands,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxiv. (1904) pp. 223 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In New Caledonia a brother
may not mention his sister's name, and she may not
mention his. The same rule is observed by male and
female cousins in regard to each other's names.<note place='foot'>Father Lambert, <q>Mœurs et superstitions
de la tribu Belep,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Missions
Catholiques</hi>, xii. (1880) pp. 30, 68;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mœurs et superstitions des Néo-Calédoniens</hi>
(Nouméa, 1900), pp.
94 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the
Banks' Islands, Melanesia, the taboos laid on the names
of persons connected by marriage are very strict. A man
will not mention the name of his father-in-law, much less
<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>
the name of his mother-in-law, nor may he name his
wife's brother; but he may name his wife's sister&mdash;she is
nothing to him. A woman may not name her father-in-law,
nor on any account her son-in-law. Two people whose
children have intermarried are also debarred from mentioning
each other's names. And not only are all these persons
forbidden to utter each other's names; they may not even
pronounce ordinary words which chance to be either identical
with these names or to have any syllables in common with
them. <q>A man on one occasion spoke to me of his house as
a shed, and when that was not understood, went and touched
it with his hand to shew what he meant; a difficulty being
still made, he looked round to be sure that no one was near
and whispered, not the name of his son's wife, but the
respectful substitute for her name, <foreign rend='italic'>amen Mulegona</foreign>, she who
was with his son, and whose name was Tuwarina, Hind-house.</q>
Again, we hear of a native of these islands who
might not use the common words for <q>pig</q> and <q>to die,</q>
because these words occurred in the polysyllabic name of his
son-in-law; and we are told of another unfortunate who
might not pronounce the everyday words for <q>hand</q> and
<q>hot</q> on account of his wife's brother's name, and who was
even debarred from mentioning the number <q>one,</q> because
the word for <q>one</q> formed part of the name of his wife's
cousin.<note place='foot'>R. H. Codrington, <hi rend='italic'>The Melanesians</hi>,
pp. 43 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Names of
relations
tabooed in
Australia.</note>
It might be expected that similar taboos on the names
of relations and on words resembling them would commonly
occur among the aborigines of Australia, and that some light
might be thrown on their origin and meaning by the primitive
modes of thought and forms of society prevalent among
these savages. Yet this expectation can scarcely be said
to be fulfilled; for the evidence of the observance of such
customs in Australia is scanty and hardly of a nature to
explain their origin. We are told that there are instances
<q>in which the names of natives are never allowed to be
spoken, as those of a father or mother-in-law, of a son-in-law,
and some cases arising from a connection with each other's
wives.</q><note place='foot'>E. J. Eyre, <hi rend='italic'>Journals of Expeditions</hi>,
ii. 339.</note> Among some Victorian tribes, a man never at
<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>
any time mentioned the name of his mother-in-law, and
from the time of his betrothal to his death neither she nor
her sisters might ever look at or speak to him. He might
not go within fifty yards of their habitation, and when he
met them on a path they immediately left it, clapped
their hands, and covering up their heads with their rugs,
walked in a stooping posture and spoke in whispers until he
had gone by. They might not talk with him, and when he
and they spoke to other people in each other's presence, they
used a special form of speech which went by the name of
<q>turn tongue.</q> This was not done with any intention of
concealing their meaning, for <q>turn tongue</q> was understood
by everybody.<note place='foot'>J. Dawson, <hi rend='italic'>Australian Aborigines</hi>,
p. 29. Specimens of this peculiar
form of speech are given by Mr. Dawson.
For example, <q>It will be very
warm by and by</q> was expressed in
the ordinary language <foreign rend='italic'>Baawan kulluun</foreign>;
in <q>turn tongue</q> it was <foreign rend='italic'>Gnullewa
gnatnæn tirambuul</foreign>.</note> A writer, who enjoyed unusually favourable
opportunities of learning the language and customs of the
Victorian aborigines, informs us that <q>A stupid custom
existed among them, which they called <foreign rend='italic'>knal-oyne</foreign>. Whenever
a female child was promised in marriage to any man, from
that very hour neither he nor the child's mother were permitted
to look upon or hear each other speak nor hear their
names mentioned by others; for, if they did, they would
immediately grow prematurely old and die.</q><note place='foot'>Joseph Parker, in Brough Smyth's
<hi rend='italic'>Aborigines of Victoria</hi>, ii. 156.</note> Among the
Gudangs of Cape York, in Queensland, and the Kowraregas
of the Prince of Wales Islands, a man carefully avoids
speaking to or even mentioning the name of his mother-in-law,
and his wife acts similarly with regard to her father-in-law.
<q>Thus the mother of a person called Nuki&mdash;which
means water&mdash;is obliged to call water by another name.</q><note place='foot'>J. Macgillivray, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the
Voyage of H. M. S. Rattlesnake</hi> (London,
1852), ii. 10 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> It is obvious that
the example given by the writer does
not illustrate his general statement.
Apparently he means to say that Nuki
is the son-in-law, not the son, of the
woman in question, and that the prohibition
to mention the names of
persons standing in that relationship
is mutual.</note>
In the Booandik tribe of South Australia persons connected
by marriage, except husbands and wives, spoke to each
other in a low whining voice, and employed words different
from those in common use.<note place='foot'>Mrs. James Smith, <hi rend='italic'>The Booandik
Tribe</hi>, p. 5.</note> Another writer, speaking of
<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>
the same tribe, says: <q>Mothers-in-law and sons-in-law
studiously avoid each other. A father-in-law converses with
his son-in-law in a low tone of voice, and in a phraseology
differing somewhat from the ordinary one.</q><note place='foot'>D. Stewart, in E. M. Curr's
<hi rend='italic'>Australian Race</hi>, iii. 461.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>These
taboos can
hardly be
accounted
for by the
intermarriage
of tribes
speaking
different
languages. Differences
of language
between
husbands
and wives. Intermixture
of
races
speaking
different
languages
would
hardly
account for
the taboos
on the
names of
relations.</note>
It will perhaps occur to the reader that customs of this
latter sort may possibly have originated in the intermarriage
of tribes speaking different languages; and there are some
Australian facts which seem at first sight to favour this
supposition. Thus with regard to the natives of South
Australia we are told that <q>the principal mark of distinction
between the tribes is difference of language or dialect;
where the tribes intermix greatly no inconvenience is
experienced on this account, as every person understands, in
addition to his own dialect, that of the neighbouring tribe;
the consequence is that two persons commonly converse in
two languages, just as an Englishman and German would
hold a conversation, each person speaking his own language,
but understanding that of the other as well as his own. This
peculiarity will often occur in one family through intermarriages,
neither party ever thinking of changing his or her
dialect for that of the other. Children do not always adopt
the language of the mother, but that of the tribe among
whom they live.</q><note place='foot'>C. W. Schürmann, in <hi rend='italic'>Native
Tribes of South Australia</hi> (Adelaide,
1879), p. 249.</note> Among some tribes of western Victoria
a man was actually forbidden to marry a wife who spoke
the same dialect as himself; and during the preliminary
visit, which each paid to the tribe of the other, neither was
permitted to speak the language of the tribe which he or
she was visiting. The children spoke the language of their
father and might never mix it with any other. To her
children the mother spoke in their father's language, but to
her husband she spoke in her own, and he answered her in
his; <q>so that all conversation is carried on between husband
and wife in the same way as between an Englishman and
a Frenchwoman, each speaking his or her own language.
This very remarkable law explains the preservation of so
many distinct dialects within so limited a space, even where
there are no physical obstacles to ready and frequent
<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/>
communication between the tribes.</q><note place='foot'>J. Dawson, <hi rend='italic'>Australian Aborigines</hi>,
pp. 27, 30 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 40. So among the
Gowmditch-mara tribe of western
Victoria the child spoke his father's
language, and not his mother's, when
she happened to be of another tribe
(Fison and Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>Kamilaroi and
Kurnai</hi>, p. 276). Compare A. W.
Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South-East
Australia</hi>, pp. 250 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> So amongst the
Sakais, an aboriginal race of the Malay Peninsula, a man goes
to a considerable distance for a wife, generally to a tribe
who speak quite a different dialect.<note place='foot'>A. Hale, <q>On the Sakais,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xv.
(1886) p. 291.</note> The Indian tribes of
French Guiana have each their own dialect and would hardly
be able to understand each other, were it not that almost
every person marries a wife or a husband of a different tribe,
and thus the newcomers serve as interpreters between the
tribe in which they live and that in which they were born
and brought up.<note place='foot'>H. A. Coudreau, <hi rend='italic'>La France
équinoxiale</hi> (Paris, 1887), ii. 178.</note> It is well known that the Carib women
spoke a language which differed in some respects from that
of the men, and the explanation generally given of the
difference is that the women preserved the language of a
race of whom the men had been exterminated and the
women married by the Caribs. This explanation is not, as
some seem to suppose, a mere hypothesis of the learned,
devised to clear up a curious discrepancy; it was a tradition
current among the Caribs themselves in the seventeenth
century,<note place='foot'>De Rochefort, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire naturelle
et morale des Iles Antilles de l'Amerique</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Rotterdam, 1665), pp. 349 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
De la Borde, <q>Relation de l'origine,
etc., des Caraibs sauvages des Isles
Antilles de l'Amerique,</q> pp. 4, 39
(<hi rend='italic'>Recueil de divers voyages faits en
Afrique et en Amerique, qui n'ont point
esté encore publiez</hi>, Paris, 1684);
Lafitau, <hi rend='italic'>Mœurs des sauvages ameriquains</hi>,
i. 55. On the language of
the Carib women see also Jean Baptiste
du Tertre, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire generale des
Isles de S. Christophe, de la Guadeloupe,
de la Martinique et autres dans
l'Amerique</hi> (Paris, 1654), p. 462;
Labat, <hi rend='italic'>Nouveau Voyage aux isles de
l'Amerique</hi> (Paris, 1713), vi. 127 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
J. N. Rat, <q>The Carib Language,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxvii. (1898) pp. 311 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and as such it deserves serious attention. But
there are other facts which seem to point to a different
explanation.<note place='foot'>See C. Sapper, <q>Mittelamericanische
Caraiben,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Internationales Archiv
für Ethnographie</hi>, x. (1897) pp. 56 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
and my article, <q>A Suggestion as to the
Origin of Gender in Language,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Fortnightly
Review</hi>, January 1900, pp.
79-90; also <hi rend='italic'>Totemism and Exogamy</hi>,
iv. 237 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among the Carayahis, a tribe of Brazilian
Indians on the Rio Grande or Araguaya River, the dialect
of the women differs from that of the men. For the most
part the differences are limited to the form and sound of the
<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>
words; only a few words seem to be quite distinct in the
two dialects. The speech of the women appears to preserve
older and fuller forms than that of the men: for instance,
<q>girl</q> is <foreign rend='italic'>yadokoma</foreign> in the female speech but <foreign rend='italic'>yadôma</foreign> in the
male; <q>nail</q> is <foreign rend='italic'>desika</foreign> in the mouth of a woman but <foreign rend='italic'>desia</foreign>
in the mouth of a man.<note place='foot'>P. Ehrenreich, <q>Materialien zur
Sprachenkunde Brasiliens,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
für Ethnologie</hi>, xxvi. (1894) pp. 23-35.</note> However such remarkable differences
are to be explained, a little reflection will probably
convince us that a mere intermixture of races speaking
different tongues could scarcely account for the phenomena
of language under consideration. For the reluctance to
mention the names or even syllables of the names of persons
connected with the speaker by marriage can hardly be
separated from the reluctance evinced by so many people
to utter their own names or the names of the dead or of
chiefs and kings; and if the reticence as to these latter
names springs mainly from superstition, we may infer that
the reticence as to the former has no better foundation.
That the savage's unwillingness to mention his own name is
based, at least in part, on a superstitious fear of the ill use
that might be made of it by his foes, whether human or
spiritual, has already been shewn. It remains to examine
the similar usage in regard to the names of the dead and of
royal personages.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='3. Names of the Dead tabooed.'/>
<head>§ 3. Names of the Dead tabooed.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The names
of the
dead are in
general not
mentioned
by the
Australian
aborigines.</note>
The custom of abstaining from all mention of the names
of the dead was observed in antiquity by the Albanians of
the Caucasus,<note place='foot'>Strabo, xi. 4. 8, p. 503.</note> and at the present day it is in full force
among many savage tribes. Thus we are told that one of
the customs most rigidly observed and enforced amongst the
Australian aborigines is never to mention the name of a
deceased person, whether male or female; to name aloud
one who has departed this life would be a gross violation of
their most sacred prejudices, and they carefully abstain from
it.<note place='foot'>G. Grey, <hi rend='italic'>Journals of Two Expeditions
of Discovery in North-West and
Western Australia</hi> (London, 1841), ii.
232, 257. The writer is here speaking
especially of western Australia, but his
statement applies, with certain restrictions which will be mentioned presently,
to all parts of the continent. For evidence
see D. Collins, <hi rend='italic'>Account of the
English Colony in New South Wales</hi>
(London, 1804), p. 390; Hueber,
<q>À travers l'Australie,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de
la Société de Géographie</hi> (Paris), Vme
Série, ix. (1865) p. 429; S. Gason,
in <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South Australia</hi>, p.
275; K. Brough Smyth, <hi rend='italic'>Aborigines of
Victoria</hi>, i. 120, ii. 297; A. L. P.
Cameron, in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xiv. (1885) p. 363;
E. M. Curr, <hi rend='italic'>The Australian Race</hi>, i.
88, 338, ii. 195, iii. 22, 29, 139, 166,
596; J. D. Lang, <hi rend='italic'>Queensland</hi> (London,
1861), pp. 367, 387, 388; C. Lumholtz,
<hi rend='italic'>Among Cannibals</hi> (London, 1889), p.
279; <hi rend='italic'>Report on the Work of the Horn
Scientific Expedition to Central Australia</hi>
(London and Melbourne, 1896),
pp. 137, 168. More evidence is
adduced below.</note> The chief motive for this abstinence appears to be a
<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>
fear of evoking the ghost, although the natural unwillingness
to revive past sorrows undoubtedly operates also to draw the
veil of oblivion over the names of the dead.<note place='foot'>On this latter motive see especially
the remarks of A. W. Howitt, in
<hi rend='italic'>Kamilaroi and Kurnai</hi>, p. 249. Compare
also C. W. Schurmann, in <hi rend='italic'>Native
Tribes of South Australia</hi>, p. 247;
F. Bonney, in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xiii. (1884) p.
127.</note> Once Mr.
Oldfield so terrified a native by shouting out the name of a
deceased person, that the man fairly took to his heels and
did not venture to shew himself again for several days. At
their next meeting he bitterly reproached the rash white man
for his indiscretion; <q>nor could I,</q> adds Mr. Oldfield, <q>induce
him by any means to utter the awful sound of a dead man's
name, for by so doing he would have placed himself in the
power of the malign spirits.</q><note place='foot'>A. Oldfield, <q>The Aborigines of
Australia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the Ethnological
Society of London</hi>, N.S., iii.
(1865) p. 238.</note> On another occasion, a
Watchandie woman having mentioned the name of a certain
man, was informed that he had long been dead. At that she
became greatly excited and spat thrice to counteract the
evil effect of having taken a dead man's name into her lips.
This custom of spitting thrice, as Mr. Oldfield afterwards
learned, was the regular charm whereby the natives freed
themselves from the power of the dangerous spirits whom
they had provoked by such a rash act.<note place='foot'>A. Oldfield, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 240.</note> Among the
aborigines of Victoria the dead were very rarely spoken of,
and then never by their names; they were referred to in a
subdued voice as <q>the lost one</q> or <q>the poor fellow that is
no more.</q> To speak of them by name would, it was supposed,
excite the malignity of Couit-gil, the spirit of the
departed, which hovers on earth for a time before it departs
for ever towards the setting sun.<note place='foot'>W. Stanbridge, <q>On the Aborigines
of Victoria,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the
Ethnological Society of London</hi>, N.S.,
i. (1861) p. 299.</note> Once when a Kurnai
<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>
man was spoken to about a dead friend, soon after the
decease, he looked round uneasily and said, <q>Do not do
that, he might hear you and kill me!</q><note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <q>On some Australian
Beliefs,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xiii. (1884) p. 191;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South-East Australia</hi>,
p. 440.</note> If a Kaiabara
black dies, his tribes-people never mention his name, but
call him <foreign rend='italic'>Wurponum</foreign>, <q>the dead,</q> and in order to explain
who it is that has died, they speak of his father, mother,
brothers, and so forth.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South-East
Australia</hi>, p. 469.</note> Of the tribes on the Lower Murray
River we are told that when a person dies <q>they carefully
avoid mentioning his name; but if compelled to do so, they
pronounce it in a very low whisper, so faint that they
imagine the spirit cannot hear their voice.</q><note place='foot'>G. F. Angas, <hi rend='italic'>Savage Life and
Scenes in Australia and New Zealand</hi>
(London, 1847), i. 94.</note> Amongst the
tribes of Central Australia no one may utter the name of
the deceased during the period of mourning, unless it is
absolutely necessary to do so, and then it is only done in a
whisper for fear of disturbing and annoying the man's spirit
which is walking about in ghostly form. If the ghost hears
his name mentioned he concludes that his kinsfolk are not
mourning for him properly; if their grief were genuine they
could not bear to bandy his name about. Touched to the
quick by their hard-hearted indifference, the indignant ghost
will come and trouble them in dreams.<note place='foot'>Spencer and Gillen, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes
of Central Australia</hi>, p. 498.</note> In these tribes no
woman may ever again mention the name of a dead person,
but the restriction on the male sex is not so absolute, for
the name may be mentioned by men of the two subclasses
to which the wife's father and wife's brother of the deceased
belong.<note place='foot'>Spencer and Gillen, <hi rend='italic'>Northern
Tribes of Central Australia</hi>, p. 526.</note> Among some tribes of north-western Australia a
dead man's name is never mentioned after his burial and he
is only spoken of as <q>that one</q>; otherwise they think that
he would return and frighten them at night in camp.<note place='foot'>E. Clement, <q>Ethnographical
Notes on the Western Australian
Aborigines,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Internationales Archiv
für Ethnographie</hi>, xvi. (1904) p. 9.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The names
of the dead
are not
uttered
by the
American
Indians.</note>
The same reluctance to utter the names of the dead
appears to prevail among all the Indian tribes of America
from Hudson's Bay Territory to Patagonia. Among the
<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>
Iroquois, for example, the name of the deceased was never
mentioned after the period of mourning had expired.<note place='foot'>L. H. Morgan, <hi rend='italic'>League of the Iroquois</hi>
(Rochester, U.S., 1851), p. 175.</note> The
same rule was rigidly observed by the Indians of California
and Oregon; its transgression might be punished with a heavy
fine or even with death.<note place='foot'>A. S. Gatschett, <hi rend='italic'>The Klamath
Indians of South-Western Oregon</hi>
(Washington, 1890) (<hi rend='italic'>Contributions to
North American Ethnology</hi>, vol. ii. pt.
1), p. xli; Chase, quoted by H. H.
Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>Native Races of the Pacific
States</hi>, i. 357, note 76.</note> Thus among the Karok of California
we are told that <q>the highest crime one can commit
is the <foreign rend='italic'>pet-chi-é-ri</foreign>, the mere mention of the dead relative's
name. It is a deadly insult to the survivors, and can be
atoned for only by the same amount of blood-money paid
for wilful murder. In default of that they will have the
villain's blood.</q><note place='foot'>S. Powers, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of California</hi>,
p. 33; compare p. 68.</note> Amongst the Wintun, also of California,
if some one in a group of merry talkers inadvertently mentions
the name of a deceased person, <q>straightway there falls
upon all an awful silence. No words can describe the
shuddering and heart-sickening terror which seizes upon them
at the utterance of that fearful word.</q><note place='foot'>S. Powers, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 240.</note> Among the Goajiros
of Colombia to mention the dead before his kinsmen is a
dreadful offence, which is often punished with death; for if
it happen on the <foreign rend='italic'>rancho</foreign> of the deceased, in presence of his
nephew or uncle, they will assuredly kill the offender on the
spot if they can. But if he escapes, the penalty resolves
itself into a heavy fine, usually of two or more oxen.<note place='foot'>F. A. Simons, <q>An Exploration
of the Goajira Peninsula, U.S. of
Colombia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the Royal
Geographical Society</hi>, vii. (1885) p. 791.</note> So
among the Abipones of Paraguay to mention the departed
by name was a serious crime, which often led to blows and
bloodshed. When it was needful to refer to such an one,
it was done by means of a general phrase such as <q>he who
is no more,</q> eked out with particulars which served to
identify the person meant.<note place='foot'>M. Dobrizhoffer, <hi rend='italic'>Historia de Abiponibus</hi>,
ii. 301, 498. For more
evidence of the observance of this
taboo among the American Indians
see A. Woldt, <hi rend='italic'>Captain Jacobsen's Reise
an der Nordwestküste Americas</hi> (Leipsic,
1884), p. 57 (as to the Indians of
the north-west coast); W. Colquhoun
Grant, <q>Description of Vancouver's
Island,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Royal Geographical
Society</hi>, xxvii. (1857) p. 303
(as to Vancouver Island); Capt.
Wilson, <q>Report on the Indian Tribes,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the Ethnological Society
of London</hi>, N.S., iv. (1866) p. 286 (as
to Vancouver Island and neighbourhood); C. Hill Tout, in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxv. (1905)
p. 138; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Far West, the Land
of the Salish and Déné</hi>, p. 201; A.
Ross, <hi rend='italic'>Adventures on the Oregon or
Columbia River</hi>, p. 322; H. R.
Schoolcraft, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes</hi>, iv. 226
(as to the Bonaks of California);
Ch. N. Bell, <q>The Mosquito Territory,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Royal Geographical
Society</hi>, xxxii. (1862) p. 255; A.
Pinart, <q>Les Indiens de l'Etat de
Panama,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue d'Ethnographie</hi>, vi.
(1887) p. 56; G. C. Musters, in <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Royal Geographical Society</hi>,
xli. (1871) p. 68 (as to Patagonia).
More evidence is adduced below.</note>
</p>

<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Many other
peoples are
reluctant to
mention
the names
of the
dead.
This
reluctance
seems to
be based
on a fear
of the
ghosts,
whose
attention
might be
attracted
by the
mention
of their
names.</note>
A similar reluctance to mention the names of the dead
is reported of peoples so widely separated from each other
as the Samoyeds of Siberia and the Todas of southern
India; the Mongols of Tartary and the Tuaregs of the Sahara;
the Ainos of Japan and the Akamba and Nandi of central
Africa; the Tinguianes of the Philippines and the inhabitants
of the Nicobar Islands, of Borneo, of Madagascar, and of Tasmania.<note place='foot'>See P. S. Pallas, <hi rend='italic'>Reise durch verschiedene
Provinzen des russischen
Reichs</hi>, iii. 76 (Samoyeds); J. W.
Breeks, <hi rend='italic'>Account of the Primitive Tribes
and Monuments of the Nīlagiris</hi> (London,
1873), p. 19; W. E. Marshall,
<hi rend='italic'>Travels amongst the Todas</hi>, p. 177; W.
H. R. Rivers, <hi rend='italic'>The Todas</hi>, pp. 462, 496,
626; Plan de Carpin (de Plano Carpini),
<hi rend='italic'>Relation des Mongols ou Tartares</hi>, ed.
D'Avezac, cap. iii. § iii.; H. Duveyrier,
<hi rend='italic'>Exploration du Sahara, les Touareg du
nord</hi> (Paris, 1864), p. 415; Lieut.
S. C. Holland, <q>The Ainos,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Anthropological Institute</hi>, iii.
(1874) p. 238; J. Batchelor, <hi rend='italic'>The Ainu
and their Folk-lore</hi> (London, 1901),
pp. 252, 564; J. M. Hildebrandt,
<q>Ethnographische Notizen über Wakamba
und ihre Nachbarn,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
für Ethnologie</hi>, x. (1878) p. 405;
A. C. Hollis, <hi rend='italic'>The Nandi</hi>, p. 71;
F. Blumentritt, <hi rend='italic'>Versuch einer Ethnographie
der Philippinen</hi> (Gotha, 1882),
p. 38 (<hi rend='italic'>Petermann's Mittheilungen,
Ergänzungsheft</hi>, No. 67); N. Fontana,
<q>On the Nicobar Isles,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Asiatick Researches</hi>,
iii. (London, 1799) p. 154;
W. H. Furness, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore in Borneo</hi>
(Wallingford, Pennsylvania, 1899), p.
26; A. van Gennep, <hi rend='italic'>Tabou et totémisme
à Madagascar</hi>, pp. 70 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
J. E. Calder, <q>Native Tribes of
Tasmania,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, iii. (1874) p. 23; J.
Bonwick, <hi rend='italic'>Daily Life of the Tasmanians</hi>,
pp. 97, 145, 183.</note>
In all cases, even where it is not expressly stated, the
fundamental reason for this avoidance is probably the fear
of the ghost. That this is the real motive with the Tuaregs
of the Sahara we are positively informed. They dread the
return of the dead man's spirit, and do all they can to avoid
it by shifting their camp after a death, ceasing for ever to
pronounce the name of the departed, and eschewing everything
that might be regarded as an evocation or recall of
his soul. Hence they do not, like the Arabs, designate
individuals by adding to their personal names the names of
their fathers; they never speak of So-and-so, son of So-and-so;
they give to every man a name which will live and die
with him.<note place='foot'>H. Duveyrier, <hi rend='italic'>Exploration du
Sahara, les Touareg du nord</hi>, p. 431.</note> So among some of the Victorian tribes in
<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>
Australia personal names were rarely perpetuated, because
the natives believed that any one who adopted the name of
a deceased person would not live long;<note place='foot'>J. Dawson, <hi rend='italic'>Australian Aborigines</hi>,
p. 42.</note> probably his
ghostly namesake was supposed to come and fetch him
away to the spirit-land. The Yabims of German New
Guinea, who believe that the spirits of the dead pass their
time in the forest eating unpalatable fruits, are unwilling to
mention the names of the deceased lest their ghosts should
suspend their habitual occupation to come and trouble the
living.<note place='foot'>K. Vetter, <hi rend='italic'>Komm herüber und
hilf uns!</hi> iii. (Barmen, 1898) p. 24;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, in <hi rend='italic'>Nachrichten über Kaiser
Wilhelms-Land und den Bismarck-Archipel</hi>,
1897, p. 92.</note> In Logea, one of the Samarai Archipelago, off the
south-eastern end of New Guinea, no custom is observed so
strictly as the one which forbids the naming of the dead in
presence of their relations. To say to a person <q>Your
fathers are dead,</q> is considered a direct challenge to
fight; it is an insult which must be avenged either by
the death of the man who pronounced these awful words,
or by the death of one of his relatives or friends. The
uttering of the names of the dead is, along with homicide,
one of the chief causes of war in the island. When
it is necessary to refer to a dead man they designate him
by such a phrase as <q>the father of So-and-so,</q> or <q>the
brother of So-and-so.</q><note place='foot'>Dr. L. Loria, <q>Notes on the
ancient War Customs of the Natives of
Logea,</q> <hi rend='italic'>British New Guinea, Annual
Report for 1894-95</hi>, pp. 45, 46 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
Compare M. Krieger, <hi rend='italic'>Neu-Guinea</hi>,
p. 322.</note> Thus the fear of mentioning the
names of the dead gives rise to circumlocutions of precisely
the same sort as those which originate in a reluctance to
name living people. Among the Klallam Indians of
Washington State no person may bear the name of his
deceased father, grandfather, or any other direct ancestor in
the paternal line.<note place='foot'>Myron Eels, <q>The Twana,
Chemakum, and Klallam Indians of
Washington Territory,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Annual Report
of the Smithsonian Institute for 1887</hi>,
part i. p. 656.</note> The Masai of eastern Africa are said to
resort to a simple device which enables them to speak of the
dead freely without risk of the inopportune appearance of
the ghost. As soon as a man or woman dies, they change
his or her name, and henceforth always speak of him or her
by the new name, while the old name falls into oblivion, and
<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>
to utter it in the presence of a kinsman of the deceased is
an insult which calls for vengeance. They assume that the
dead man will not know his new name, and so will not
answer to it when he hears it pronounced.<note place='foot'>Baron C. C. von der Decken,
<hi rend='italic'>Reisen in Ost-Afrika</hi> (Leipsic, 1869-1871),
ii. 25; R. Andree, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographische
Parallelen und Vergleiche</hi>,
pp. 182 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Ghosts are
notoriously dull-witted; nothing is easier than to dupe
them. However, according to another and more probable
account, the name of a Masai is not changed after his
death; it is merely suppressed, and he or she is referred to
by a descriptive phrase, such as <q>my brother,</q> <q>my uncle,</q>
<q>my sister.</q> To call a dead man by his name is deemed
most unlucky, and is never done except with the intention
of doing harm to his surviving family, who make great
lamentations on such an occasion.<note place='foot'>S. L. Hinde and H. Hinde, <hi rend='italic'>The
last of the Masai</hi> (London, 1901), p.
50; Sir H. Johnston, <hi rend='italic'>The Uganda
Protectorate</hi>, ii. 826.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The like
fear leads
people who
bear the
same name
as the dead
to change
it for
another.</note>
The same fear of the ghost, which moves people to
suppress his old name, naturally leads all persons who bear
a similar name to exchange it for another, lest its utterance
should attract the attention of the ghost, who cannot
reasonably be expected to discriminate between all the
different applications of the same name. Thus we are told
that in the Adelaide and Encounter Bay tribes of South
Australia the repugnance to mentioning the names of
those who have died lately is carried so far, that persons
who bear the same name as the deceased abandon it, and
either adopt temporary names or are known by any others
that happen to belong to them.<note place='foot'>W. Wyatt, in <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of
South Australia</hi>, p. 165.</note> The same practice was
observed by the aborigines of New South Wales,<note place='foot'>D. Collins, <hi rend='italic'>Account of the English
Colony in New South Wales</hi> (London,
1804), p. 392.</note> and is
said to be observed by the tribes of the Lower Murray
River,<note place='foot'>P. Beveridge, <q>Notes on the
Dialects, Habits, and Mythology of the
Lower Murray Aborigines,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transactions
of the Royal Society of Victoria</hi>,
vi. 20 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and of King George's Sound in western Australia.<note place='foot'><q>Description of the Natives of
King George's Sound (Swan River) and
adjoining Country,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the R.
Geographical Society</hi>, i. (1832) pp. 46
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
A similar custom prevails among some of the Queensland
tribes; but the prohibition to use the names of the dead is
not permanent, though it may last for many years. On the
<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>
Bloomfield River, when a namesake dies, the survivor is
called Tanyu, a word whose meaning is unknown; or else
he or she receives a name which refers to the corpse, with
the syllable Wau prefixed to it. For example, he may be
called Wau-batcha, with reference to the place where the
man was buried; or Wau-wotchinyu (<q>burnt</q>), with reference
to the cremation of the body. And if there should be
several people in camp all bearing one of these allusive
designations, they are distinguished from each other by the
mention of the names of their mothers or other relatives,
even though these last have long been dead and gone.
Whenever Mr. W. E. Roth, to whom we owe this information,
could obtain an explanation of the custom, the reason
invariably assigned was a fear that the ghost, hearing himself
called by name, might return and cause mischief.<note place='foot'>W. E. Roth, <hi rend='italic'>North Queensland
Ethnography, Bulletin No. 5</hi> (Brisbane,
1903), § 72, p. 20.</note> In some
Australian tribes the change of name thus brought about is
permanent; the old name is laid aside for ever, and the
man is known by his new name for the rest of his life, or at
least until he is obliged to change it again for a like reason.<note place='foot'>G. F. Angas, <hi rend='italic'>Savage Life and
Scenes in Australia and New Zealand</hi>
(London, 1847), ii. 228.</note>
Among the North American Indians all persons, whether
men or women, who bore the name of one who had just died
were obliged to abandon it and to adopt other names, which
was formally done at the first ceremony of mourning for
the dead.<note place='foot'>J. F. Lafitau, <hi rend='italic'>Mœurs des sauvages
ameriquains</hi>, ii. 434; R. Southey,
<hi rend='italic'>History of Brazil</hi>, iii. 894 (referring
to Roger Williams).</note> In some tribes to the east of the Rocky
Mountains this change of name lasted only during the
season of mourning,<note place='foot'>Charlevoix, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de la Nouvelle
France</hi>, vi. 109.</note> but in other tribes on the Pacific
Coast of North America it seems to have been permanent.<note place='foot'>S. Powers, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of California</hi>,
p. 349; Myron Eels, <q>The Twana,
Chemakum, and Klallam Indians of
Washington Territory,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Annual Report
of the Smithsonian Institute for 1887</hi>,
p. 656.</note>
Amongst the Masai also, when two men of the same tribe
bear the same name, and one of them dies, the survivor
changes his name.<note place='foot'>S. L. Hinde and H. Hinde, <hi rend='italic'>The
Last of the Masai</hi>, p. 50.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sometimes
all the near
relations
of the
deceased
change
their
names.</note>
Sometimes by an extension of the same reasoning all
the near relations of the deceased change their names, whatever
<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>
they may happen to be, doubtless from a fear that the
sound of the familiar names might lure back the vagrant
spirit to its old home. Thus in some Victorian tribes the
ordinary names of all the next of kin were disused during
the period of mourning, and certain general terms, prescribed
by custom, were substituted for them. To call a mourner
by his own name was considered an insult to the departed,
and often led to fighting and bloodshed.<note place='foot'>J. Dawson, <hi rend='italic'>Australian Aborigines</hi>,
p. 42.</note> Among Indian
tribes of north-western America near relations of the deceased
often change their names <q>under an impression that spirits
will be attracted back to earth if they hear familiar names
often repeated.</q><note place='foot'>H. H. Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>Native Races of
the Pacific States</hi>, i. 248. Compare
K. F. v. Baer und Gr. v. Helmersen,
<hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur Kenntniss des russischen
Reiches und der angränzenden Länder
Asiens</hi>, i. (St. Petersburg, 1839), p.
108 (as to the Kenayens of Cook's
Inlet and the neighbourhood).</note> Among the Kiowa Indians the name of
the dead is never spoken in the presence of the relatives, and
on the death of any member of a family all the others take
new names. This custom was noted by Raleigh's colonists
on Roanoke Island more than three centuries ago.<note place='foot'>J. Mooney, <q>Calendar History of
the Kiowa Indians,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Seventeenth Annual
Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</hi>,
part i. (Washington, 1898) p.
231.</note> Among
the Lengua Indians of the Gran Chaco in South America not
only is a dead man's name never mentioned, but all the
survivors change their names also. They say that Death has
been among them and has carried off a list of the living, and
that he will soon come back for more victims; hence in order
to defeat his fell purpose they change their names, believing
that on his return Death, though he has got them all on his
list, will not be able to identify them under their new names,
and will depart to pursue the search elsewhere.<note place='foot'>F. de Azara, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages dans
l'Amérique Méridionale</hi> (Paris, 1808),
ii. 153 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> So among
the Guaycurus of the Gran Chaco, when a death had taken
place, the chief used to change the names of every person in
the tribe, man and woman, young and old, and it is said to
have been wonderful to observe how from that moment
everybody remembered his new name just as if he had borne
it all his life.<note place='foot'>P. Lozano, <hi rend='italic'>Descripcion chorographica</hi>,
etc., <hi rend='italic'>del Gran Chaco</hi> (Cordova,
1733), p. 70.</note> Nicobarese mourners take new names in
order to escape the unwelcome attentions of the ghost; and
<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>
for the same purpose they disguise themselves by shaving
their heads so that the ghost is unable to recognise them.<note place='foot'>E. H. Man, <q>Notes on the
Nicobarese,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>, xxviii.
(1899) p. 261. Elsewhere I have
suggested that mourning costume in
general may have been adopted with
this intention. See <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xv. (1886)
pp. 73, 98 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
The Chukchees of Bering Strait believe that the souls of the
dead turn into malignant spirits who seek to harm the living.
Hence when a mother dies the name of her youngest and
dearest child is changed, in order that her ghost may not
know the child.<note place='foot'>J. Enderli, <q>Zwei Jahre bei den
Tchuktschen und Korjaken,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Petermanns
Mitteilungen</hi>, xlix. (1903) p.
257.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>When the
name of the
deceased
is that of a
common
object, the
word is
often
dropped in
ordinary
speech and
another
substituted
for it.</note>
Further, when the name of the deceased happens to be
that of some common object, such as an animal, or plant, or
fire, or water, it is sometimes considered necessary to drop
that word in ordinary speech and replace it by another. A
custom of this sort, it is plain, may easily be a potent agent
of change in language; for where it prevails to any considerable
extent many words must constantly become obsolete
and new ones spring up. And this tendency has been
remarked by observers who have recorded the custom in
Australia, America, and elsewhere. For example, with
regard to the Australian aborigines it has been noted that
<q>the dialects change with almost every tribe. Some tribes
name their children after natural objects; and when the
person so named dies, the word is never again mentioned;
another word has therefore to be invented for the object
after which the child was called.</q> The writer gives as an
instance the case of a man whose name Karla signified
<q>fire</q>; when Karla died, a new word for fire had to be
introduced. <q>Hence,</q> adds the writer, <q>the language is
always changing.</q><note place='foot'>R. Brough Smyth, <hi rend='italic'>Aborigines of
Victoria</hi>, ii. 266.</note> In the Moorunde tribe the name for
<q>teal</q> used to be <foreign rend='italic'>torpool</foreign>; but when a boy called Torpool
died, a new name (<foreign rend='italic'>tilquaitch</foreign>) was given to the bird, and the
old name dropped out altogether from the language of the
tribe.<note place='foot'>E. J. Eyre, <hi rend='italic'>Journals of Expeditions
of Discovery</hi>, ii. 354 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Sometimes, however, such substitutes for common
words were only in vogue for a limited time after the death,
and were then discarded in favour of the old words. Thus
among the Kowraregas of the Prince of Wales' Islands and
<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>
the Gudangs of Cape York in Queensland, the names of the
dead are never mentioned without great reluctance, so that,
for example, when a man named Us, or quartz, died, the
name of the stone was changed to <foreign rend='italic'>nattam ure</foreign>, <q>the thing
which is a namesake,</q> but the original word would gradually
return to common use.<note place='foot'>J. Macgillivray, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the
Voyage of H.M.S. Rattlesnake</hi> (London,
1852), ii. 10 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Again, a missionary, who lived
among the Victorian aborigines, remarks that <q>it is
customary among these blacks to disuse a word when a
person has died whose name was the same, or even of the
same sound. I find great difficulty in getting blacks to
repeat such words. I believe this custom is common to all
the Victorian tribes, though in course of time the word is
resumed again. I have seen among the Murray blacks the
dead freely spoken of when they have been dead some
time.</q><note place='foot'>J. Bulmer, in Brough Smyth's
<hi rend='italic'>Aborigines of Victoria</hi>, ii. 94.</note> Again, in the Encounter Bay tribe of South
Australia, if a man of the name of Ngnke, which means
<q>water,</q> were to die, the whole tribe would be obliged to
use some other word to express water for a considerable
time after his decease. The writer who records this custom
surmises that it may explain the presence of a number of
synonyms in the language of the tribe.<note place='foot'>H. E. A. Meyer, in <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes
of South Australia</hi>, p. 199, compare
p. xxix.</note> This conjecture is
confirmed by what we know of some Victorian tribes whose
speech comprised a regular set of synonyms to be used
instead of the common terms by all members of a tribe in
times of mourning. For instance, if a man called Waa
(<q>crow</q>) departed this life, during the period of mourning
for him nobody might call a crow a <foreign rend='italic'>waa</foreign>; everybody had to
speak of the bird as a <foreign rend='italic'>narrapart</foreign>. When a person who
rejoiced in the title of Ringtail Opossum (<foreign rend='italic'>weearn</foreign>) had
gone the way of all flesh, his sorrowing relations and the
tribe at large were bound for a time to refer to ringtail
opossums by the more sonorous name of <foreign rend='italic'>manuungkuurt</foreign>.
If the community were plunged in grief for the loss of a
respected female who bore the honourable name of Turkey
Bustard, the proper name for turkey bustards, which was
<foreign rend='italic'>barrim barrim</foreign>, went out, and <foreign rend='italic'>tillit tilliitsh</foreign> came in. And so
<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>mutatis mutandis</foreign> with the names of Black Cockatoo, Grey
Duck, Gigantic Crane, Kangaroo, Eagle, Dingo, and the
rest.<note place='foot'>J. Dawson, <hi rend='italic'>Australian Aborigines</hi>,
p. 43. Mr. Howitt mentions the case
of a native who arbitrarily substituted
the name <foreign rend='italic'>nobler</foreign> (<q>spirituous liquor</q>)
for <foreign rend='italic'>yan</foreign> (<q>water</q>) because Yan was
the name of a man who had recently
died (<hi rend='italic'>Kamilaroi and Kurnai</hi>, p. 249).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>This
custom
has transformed
some of the
languages
of the
American
Indians.</note>
A similar custom used to be constantly transforming the
language of the Abipones of Paraguay, amongst whom,
however, a word once abolished seems never to have been
revived. New words, says the missionary Dobrizhoffer,
sprang up every year like mushrooms in a night, because
all words that resembled the names of the dead were
abolished by proclamation and others coined in their place.
The mint of words was in the hands of the old women of
the tribe, and whatever term they stamped with their
approval and put in circulation was immediately accepted
without a murmur by high and low alike, and spread like
wildfire through every camp and settlement of the tribe.
You would be astonished, says the same missionary, to see
how meekly the whole nation acquiesces in the decision of a
withered old hag, and how completely the old familiar words
fall instantly out of use and are never repeated either
through force of habit or forgetfulness. In the seven years
that Dobrizhoffer spent among these Indians the native word
for jaguar was changed thrice, and the words for crocodile,
thorn, and the slaughter of cattle underwent similar though
less varied vicissitudes. As a result of this habit, the
vocabularies of the missionaries teemed with erasures, old
words having constantly to be struck out as obsolete and
new ones inserted in their place.<note place='foot'>M. Dobrizhoffer, <hi rend='italic'>Historia de
Abiponibus</hi> (Vienna, 1784), ii. 199,
301.</note> Similarly, a peculiar
feature of the Comanche language is that a portion of the
vocabulary is continually changing. If, for example, a
person called Eagle or Bison dies, a new name is invented
for the bird or beast, because it is forbidden to mention the
name of any one who is dead.<note place='foot'>H. Ten Kate, <q>Notes ethnographiques
sur les Comanches,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue
d'Ethnographie</hi>, iv. (1885) p. 131.</note> So amongst the Kiowa
Indians all words that suggest the name of a deceased
person are dropped for a term of years and other words
<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>
are substituted for them. The old word may after the
lapse of years be restored, but it often happens that the
new one keeps its place and the original word is entirely
forgotten. Old men sometimes remember as many as three
different names which have been successively used for the
same thing. The new word is commonly a novel combination
of existing roots, or a novel use of a current word,
rather than a deliberately invented term.<note place='foot'>J. Mooney, <q>Calendar History
of the Kiowa Indians,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Seventeenth
Annual Report of the Bureau of American
Ethnology</hi>, part i. (Washington,
1898) p. 231.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A similar
custom has
modified
languages
in Africa,
Buru, New
Guinea,
the
Caroline
Islands, and
the Nicobarese.</note>
The Basagala, a cattle-breeding people to the west of
Uganda, cease to use a word if it was the name of an
influential person who has died. For example, after the
death of a chief named Mwenda, which means <q>nine,</q> the
name for the numeral was changed.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe in a letter to me
dated Mengo, Uganda, 17th February
1904.</note> <q>On the death
of a child, or a warrior, or a woman amongst the Masai,
the body is thrown away, and the person's name is buried,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> it is never again mentioned by the family. Should
there be anything which is called by that name, it is
given another name which is not like that of the deceased,
For instance, if an unimportant person called Ol-onana (he
who is soft, or weak, or gentle) were to die, gentleness would
not be called <foreign rend='italic'>enanai</foreign> in that kraal, but it would be called by
another name, such as <foreign rend='italic'>epolpol</foreign> (it is smooth).... If an elder
dies leaving children, his name is not buried for his descendants
are named after him.</q><note place='foot'>A. C. Hollis, <hi rend='italic'>The Masai</hi> (Oxford,
1905), pp. 304 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> As to the Masai
customs in this respect see also above,
pp. <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>.</note> From this statement, which is
translated from a native account in the Masai language, we
may perhaps infer that among the Masai it is as a rule only
the childless dead whose names are avoided. In the island of
Buru it is unlawful to mention the names of the dead or
any words that resemble them in sound.<note place='foot'>J. H. W. van der Miesen, <q>Een
en ander over Boeroe,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xlvi. (1902) p. 455.</note> In many tribes
of British New Guinea the names of persons are also the
names of common things. The people believe that if the
name of a deceased person is pronounced, his spirit will
return, and as they have no wish to see it back among
them the mention of his name is tabooed and a new word
<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>
is created to take its place, whenever the name happens to
be a common term of the language.<note place='foot'>Sir William Macgregor, <hi rend='italic'>British
New Guinea</hi> (London, 1897), p.
79.</note> Thus at Waga-waga,
near the south-eastern extremity of New Guinea,
the names of the dead become taboo immediately after
death, and if they are, as generally happens, the names
of common objects, new words must be adopted for
these things and the old words are dropped from the
language, so long at least as the memory of the dead survives.
For example, when a man died whose name Binama
meant <q>hornbill,</q> a new name <foreign rend='italic'>ambadina</foreign>, literally <q>the
plasterer,</q> was adopted for the bird. Consequently many
words are permanently lost or revived with modified or new
meanings. The frequent changes of vocabulary caused by
this custom are very inconvenient, and nowadays the practice
of using foreign words as substitutes is coming more and
more into vogue. English profanity now contributes its
share to the language of these savages.<note place='foot'>C. G. Seligmann, <hi rend='italic'>The Melanesians
of British New Guinea</hi> (Cambridge,
1910), pp. 629-631.</note> In the Caroline
Islands the ordinary name for pig is <foreign rend='italic'>puik</foreign>, but in the Paliker
district of Ponape the pig is called not <foreign rend='italic'>puik</foreign> but <foreign rend='italic'>man-teitei</foreign>,
or <q>the animal that grubs in the soil,</q> for the word <foreign rend='italic'>puik</foreign>
was there tabooed after the death of a man named Puik.
<q>This is a living instance showing how under our very eyes
old words are dropping out of use in these isolated dialects
and new ones are taking their place.</q><note place='foot'>F. W. Christian, <hi rend='italic'>The Caroline
Islands</hi> (London, 1899), p. 366.</note> In the Nicobar
Islands a similar practice has similarly affected the speech
of the natives. <q>A most singular custom,</q> says Mr. de
Roepstorff, <q>prevails among them which one would suppose
must most effectually hinder the <q>making of history,</q> or, at
any rate, the transmission of historical narrative. By a
strict rule, which has all the sanction of Nicobar superstition,
no man's name may be mentioned after his death! To such
a length is this carried that when, as very frequently happens,
the man rejoiced in the name of <q>Fowl,</q> <q>Hat,</q> <q>Fire,</q> <q>Road,</q>
etc., in its Nicobarese equivalent, the use of these words is
carefully eschewed for the future, not only as being the
personal designation of the deceased, but even as the names
<pb n='363'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>
of the common things they represent; the words die out of
the language, and either new vocables are coined to express
the thing intended, or a substitute for the disused word is
found in other Nicobarese dialects or in some foreign tongue.
This extraordinary custom not only adds an element of
instability to the language, but destroys the continuity of
political life, and renders the record of past events precarious
and vague, if not impossible.</q><note place='foot'>F. A. de Roepstorff, <q>Tiomberombi,
a Nicobar Tale,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Asiatic Society of Bengal</hi>, liii. (1884)
pt. i. pp. 24 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> In some tribes
apparently the names of the dead are
only tabooed in the presence of their
relations. See C. Hill-Tout, in <q>Report
of the Committee on the Ethnological
Survey of Canada,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Report of
the British Association for the Advancement
of Science</hi>, Bradford, 1900,
p. 484; G. Brown, <hi rend='italic'>Melanesians and
Polynesians</hi> (London, 1910), p. 399.
But in the great majority of the
accounts which I have consulted no
such limitation of the taboo is mentioned.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The suppression
of
the names
of the dead
cuts at the
root of
historical
tradition.</note>
That a superstition which suppresses the names of the
dead must cut at the very root of historical tradition has
been remarked by other workers in this field. <q>The
Klamath people,</q> observes Mr. A. S. Gatschet, <q>possess no
historic traditions going further back in time than a
century, for the simple reason that there was a strict
law prohibiting the mention of the person or acts of a
deceased individual by <emph>using his name</emph>. This law was
rigidly observed among the Californians no less than among
the Oregonians, and on its transgression the death penalty
could be inflicted. This is certainly enough to suppress all
historical knowledge within a people. How can history be
written without names?</q><note place='foot'>A. S. Gatschet, <hi rend='italic'>The Klamath
Indians of South-Western Oregon</hi>
(Washington, 1890), p. xli. (<hi rend='italic'>Contributions
to North American Ethnology</hi>,
vol. ii. pt. I).</note> Among some of the tribes of
New South Wales the simple ditties, never more than two
lines long, to which the natives dance, are never transmitted
from one generation to another, because, when the rude poet
dies, <q>all the songs of which he was author are, as it were,
buried with him, inasmuch as they, in common with his very
name, are studiously ignored from thenceforward, consequently
they are quite forgotten in a very short space of
time indeed. This custom of endeavouring persistently to
forget everything which had been in any way connected
with the dead entirely precludes the possibility of anything
of an historical nature having existence amongst them; in
<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>
fact the most vital occurrence, if only dating a single generation
back, is quite forgotten, that is to say, if the recounting
thereof should necessitate the mention of a defunct
aboriginal's name.</q><note place='foot'>P. Beveridge, <q>Of the Aborigines
inhabiting the great Lacustrine and
Riverine Depression of the Lower
Murray,</q> etc., <hi rend='italic'>Journal and Proceedings
of the Royal Society of New South
Wales for 1883</hi>, vol. xvii. p. 65. The
custom of changing common words on
the death of persons who bore them as
their names seems also to have been
observed by the Tasmanians. See J.
Bonwick, <hi rend='italic'>Daily Life of the Tasmanians</hi>,
p. 145.</note> Thus among these simple savages
even a sacred bard could not avail to rescue an Australian
Agamemnon from the long night of oblivion.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sometimes
the names
of the dead
are revived
after a
certain
time. The
American
Indians
used to
bring the
dead to
life again by
solemnly
bestowing
their names
on living
persons,
who were
thereafter
regarded
as reincarnations
of
the dead.</note>
In many tribes, however, the power of this superstition to
blot out the memory of the past is to some extent weakened
and impaired by a natural tendency of the human mind.
Time, which wears out the deepest impressions, inevitably
dulls, if it does not wholly efface, the print left on the savage
mind by the mystery and horror of death. Sooner or later,
as the memory of his loved ones fades slowly away, he
becomes more willing to speak of them, and thus their rude
names may sometimes be rescued by the philosophic enquirer
before they have vanished, like autumn leaves or winter
snows, into the vast undistinguished limbo of the past.
This was Sir George Grey's experience when he attempted
to trace the intricate system of kinship prevalent among the
natives of western Australia. He says: <q>It is impossible
for any person, not well acquainted with the language of the
natives, and who does not possess great personal influence
over them, to pursue an inquiry of this nature; for one of
the customs most rigidly observed and enforced amongst
them is, never to mention the name of a deceased person,
male or female. In an inquiry, therefore, which principally
turns upon the names of their ancestors, this prejudice must
be every moment violated, and a very great difficulty
encountered in the outset. The only circumstance which at
all enabled me to overcome this was, that the longer a
person has been dead the less repugnance do they evince in
uttering his name. I, therefore, in the first instance,
endeavoured to ascertain only the oldest names on record;
and on subsequent occasions, when I found a native alone,
and in a loquacious humour, I succeeded in filling up some
<pb n='365'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>
of the blanks. Occasionally, round their fires at night, I
managed to involve them in disputes regarding their
ancestors, and, on these occasions, gleaned much of the
information of which I was in want.</q><note place='foot'>G. Grey, <hi rend='italic'>Journals of two Expeditions
of Discovery in North-West and
Western Australia</hi>, ii. 231 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In some of the
Victorian tribes the prohibition to mention the names of the
dead remained in force only during the period of mourning;<note place='foot'>J. Dawson, <hi rend='italic'>Australian Aborigines</hi>,
p. 42.</note>
in the Port Lincoln tribe of South Australia it
lasted many years.<note place='foot'>C. W. Schürmann, in <hi rend='italic'>Native
Tribes of South Australia</hi>, p. 247.</note> Among the Chinook Indians of North
America <q>custom forbids the mention of a dead man's
name, at least till many years have elapsed after the
bereavement.</q><note place='foot'>H. H. Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>Native Races of
the Pacific States</hi>, iii. 156.</note> In the Twana, Chemakum, and Klallam
tribes of Washington State the names of deceased
members may be mentioned two or three years after their
death.<note place='foot'>Myron Eels, <q>The Twana, Chemakum,
and Klallam Indians of Washington
Territory,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Annual Report of the
Smithsonian Institution for 1887</hi>, p.
656.</note> Among the Puyallup Indians the observance of the
taboo is relaxed after several years, when the mourners have
forgotten their grief; and if the deceased was a famous
warrior, one of his descendants, for instance a great-grandson,
may be named after him. In this tribe the
taboo is not much observed at any time except by the
relations of the dead.<note place='foot'>S. R. M'Caw, <q>Mortuary Customs
of the Puyallups,</q> <hi rend='italic'>The American
Antiquarian and Oriental Journal</hi>,
viii. (1886) p. 235.</note> Similarly the Jesuit missionary
Lafitau tells us that the name of the departed and the
similar names of the survivors were, so to say, buried with
the corpse until, the poignancy of their grief being abated,
it pleased the relations to <q>lift up the tree and raise the
dead.</q> By raising the dead they meant bestowing the
name of the departed upon some one else, who thus became
to all intents and purposes a reincarnation of the deceased,
since on the principles of savage philosophy the name is a
vital part, if not the soul, of the man. When Father
Lafitau arrived at St. Louis to begin work among the
Iroquois, his colleagues decided that in order to make a
favourable impression on his flock the new shepherd should
assume the native name of his deceased predecessor, Father
<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>
Brüyas, <q>the celebrated missionary,</q> who had lived many
years among the Indians and enjoyed their high esteem.
But Father Brüyas had been called from his earthly labours
to his heavenly rest only four short months before, and it
was too soon, in the phraseology of the Iroquois, to <q>raise
up the tree.</q> However, raised up it was in spite of them;
and though some bolder spirits protested that their new
pastor had wronged them by taking the name of his
predecessor, <q>nevertheless,</q> says Father Lafitau, <q>they did
not fail to regard me as himself in another form (<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>un autre
lui-même</foreign>), since I had entered into all his rights.</q> <note place='foot'>J. F. Lafitau, <hi rend='italic'>Mœurs des sauvages
ameriquains</hi> (Paris, 1724), ii. 434.
Charlevoix merely says that the taboo on
the names of the dead lasted <q>a certain
time</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Histoire de la Nouvelle France</hi>,
vi. 109). <q>A good long while</q> is the
phrase used by Captain J. G. Bourke
in speaking of the same custom among
the Apaches (<hi rend='italic'>On the Border with Crook</hi>,
p. 132).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mode of
reviving
the dead
in the
persons
of their
namesakes
among the
North
American
Indians.</note>
The same mode of bringing a dead man to life again by
bestowing his name upon a living person was practised by
the Hurons and other Indian tribes of Canada. An early
French traveller in Canada has described the ceremony
of resurrection as it was observed by a tribe whom he
calls the Attiuoindarons. He says: <q>The Attiuoindarons
practise resurrections of the dead, principally of persons who
have deserved well of their country by their remarkable
services, so that the memory of illustrious and valiant men
revives in a certain way in others. Accordingly they call
assemblies for this purpose and hold councils, at which they
choose one of them who has the same virtues and qualities,
if possible, as he had whom they wish to resuscitate; or at
least he must be of irreproachable life, judged by the standard
of a savage people. Wishing, then, to proceed to the
resurrection they all stand up, except him who is to be
resuscitated, to whom they give the name of the deceased,
and all letting their hands down very low they pretend to
lift him up from the earth, intending by that to signify that
they draw the great personage deceased from the grave and
restore him to life in the person of this other, who stands up
and, after great acclamations of the people, receives the
presents which the bystanders offer him. They further
hold several feasts in his honour and regard him thenceforth
as the deceased whom he represents; and by this
<pb n='367'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>
means the memory of virtuous men and of good and
valiant captains never dies among them.</q><note place='foot'>Gabriel Sagard, <hi rend='italic'>Le Grand Voyage
du pays des Hurons</hi>, Nouvelle Édition
(Paris, 1865), p. 202. The original
edition of Sagard's book was published
at Paris in 1632.</note> Among the
Hurons the ceremony took place between the death and the
great Festival of the Dead, which was usually celebrated
at intervals of twelve years. When it was resolved to resuscitate
a departed warrior, the members of his family met
and decided which of them was to be regarded as an incarnation
of the deceased. If the dead man had been a
famous chief and leader in war, his living representative and
namesake succeeded to his functions. Presents were made
to him, and he entertained the whole tribe at a magnificent
banquet. His old robes were taken from him, and he was
clad in richer raiment. Thereupon a herald proclaimed
aloud the mystery of the incarnation. <q>Let all the people,</q>
he said, <q>remain silent. Open your ears and shut your
mouths. That which I am about to say is of importance.
Our business is to resuscitate a dead man and to bring a great
captain to life again.</q> With that he named the dead man
and all his posterity, and reminded his hearers of the place
and manner of his death. Then turning to him who was to
succeed the departed, he lifted up his voice: <q>Behold him,</q>
he cried, <q>clad in this beautiful robe. It is not he whom you
saw these past days, who was called Nehap. He has given
his name to another, and he himself is now called Etouait</q>
(the name of the defunct). <q>Look on him as the true
captain of this nation. It is he whom you are bound to
obey; it is he whom you are bound to listen to; it is he
whom you are bound to honour.</q> The new incarnation
meanwhile maintained a dignified silence, and afterwards led
the young braves out to war in order to prove that he had
inherited the courage and virtues as well as the name of
the dead chief.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Relations des Jésuites</hi>, 1636, p.
131; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, 1642, pp. 53, 85; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
1644, pp. 66 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (Canadian reprint,
Quebec, 1858).</note> The Carrier Indians of British Columbia
firmly believe <q>that a departed soul can, if it pleases, come
back to the earth, in a human shape or body, in order to see
his friends, who are still alive. Therefore, as they are about
to set fire to the pile of wood on which a corpse is laid, a
<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>
relation of the deceased person stands at his feet, and asks
him if he will ever come back among them. Then the
priest or magician, with a grave countenance, stands at the
head of the corpse, and looks through both his hands on its
naked breast, and then raises them toward heaven, and
blows through them, as they say, the soul of the deceased,
that it may go and find, and enter into a relative. Or, if
any relative is present, the priest will hold both his hands
on the head of this person, and blow through them, that the
spirit of the deceased may enter into him or her; and
then, as they affirm, the first child which this person has
will possess the soul of the deceased person.</q><note place='foot'>Daniel W. Harmon, quoted by
Rev. Jedidiah Morse, <hi rend='italic'>Report to the
Secretary of War of the United States
on Indian Affairs</hi> (New-Haven, 1822),
Appendix, p. 345. The custom seems
now to be extinct. It is not mentioned
by Father A. G. Morice in his accounts
of the tribe (in <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the
Canadian Institute</hi>, Third Series, vol.
vii. 1888-89; <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the
Canadian Institute</hi>, vol. iv. 1892-93;
<hi rend='italic'>Annual Archaeological Report</hi>, Toronto,
1905).</note> The writer
does not say that the infant took the name of the deceased
who was born again in it; but probably it did. For sometimes
the priest would transfer the soul from a dead to a
living person, who in that case took the name of the departed
in addition to his own.<note place='foot'>Ch. Wilkes, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the
United States Exploring Expedition</hi>
(New York, 1851), iv. 453.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The dead
revived
in their
namesakes
among the
Lapps,
Khonds,
Yorubas,
Baganda,
and
Makalaka.</note>
Among the Lapps, when a woman was with child and
near the time of her delivery, a deceased ancestor or relation
(known as a <foreign rend='italic'>Jabmek</foreign>) used to appear to her in a dream and
inform her what dead person was to be born again in her
infant, and whose name the child was therefore to bear. If
the woman had no such dream, it fell to the father or the
relatives to determine the name by divination or by consulting
a wizard.<note place='foot'>E. J. Jessen, <hi rend='italic'>De Finnorum Lapponumque
Norwegicorum religione pagana</hi>,
pp. 33 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (bound up with C. Leemius,
<hi rend='italic'>De Lapponibus Finmarchiae eorumque
lingua, vita, et religione pristina commentatio</hi>,
Copenhagen, 1767).</note> Among the Khonds a birth is celebrated on
the seventh day after the event by a feast given to the priest
and to the whole village. To determine the child's name the
priest drops grains of rice into a cup of water, naming with
each grain a deceased ancestor. From the movements of
the seed in the water, and from observations made on the
person of the infant, he pronounces which of his progenitors
has reappeared in him, and the child generally, at least
<pb n='369'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>
among the northern tribes, receives the name of that
ancestor.<note place='foot'>Major S. C. Macpherson, <hi rend='italic'>Memorials
of Service in India</hi> (London, 1865),
pp. 72 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among the Ewe-speaking peoples of Togo, in
West Africa, when a woman is in hard labour, a fetish
priest or priestess is called in to disclose the name of the
deceased relative who has just been born again into the
world in the person of the infant. The name of that
relative is bestowed on the child.<note place='foot'>C. Spiess, <q>Einiges über die
Bedeutung der Personennamen der
Evheer in Togo-Gebiete,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen
des Seminars für orientalische
Sprachen zu Berlin</hi>, vi. (1903) Dritte
Abtheilung, pp. 56 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among the Yorubas,
soon after a child has been born, a priest of Ifa, the god
of divination, appears on the scene to ascertain what ancestral
soul has been reborn in the infant. As soon as this has
been decided, the parents are told that the child must conform
in all respects to the manner of life of the ancestor who
now animates him or her, and if, as often happens, they
profess ignorance, the priest supplies the necessary information.
The child usually receives the name of the ancestor
who has been born again in him.<note place='foot'>A. B. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>The Yoruba-speaking
Peoples of the Slave Coast</hi>, p. 152; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave
Coast</hi>, pp. 153 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> In the former
passage the writer says nothing about
the child's name. In the latter he
merely says that an ancestor is supposed
to have sent the child, who accordingly
commonly takes the name of that
ancestor. But the analogy of other
peoples makes it highly probable that,
as Col. Ellis himself states in his later
work (<hi rend='italic'>The Yoruba-speaking Peoples</hi>),
the ancestor is believed to be incarnate
in the child. That the Yoruba child
takes the name of the ancestor who
has come to life again in him is
definitely stated by A. Dieterich in
<hi rend='italic'>Archiv für Religionswissenschaft</hi>, viii.
(1904) p. 20, referring to <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
für Missionskunde und Religionswissenschaft</hi>,
xv. (1900) p. 17, a work
to which I have not access. Dieterich's
account of the subject of rebirth (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
pp. 18-21) deserves to be consulted.</note> In Uganda a child is
named with much ceremony by its grandfather, who bestows
on it the name of one of its ancestors, but never the name of
its father. The spirit of the deceased namesake then enters
the child and assists him through life.<note place='foot'>J. Roscoe, <q>Further Notes on the
Manners and Customs of the Baganda,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxii. (1902) p. 32.</note> Here the reincarnation
of the ancestor appears to be effected by giving his
name, and with it his soul, to his descendant. The same
idea seems to explain a curious ceremony observed by the
Makalaka of South Africa at the naming of a child. The
spirit of the ancestor (<foreign rend='italic'>motsimo</foreign>), whose name the child is to
bear, is represented by an elderly kinsman or kinswoman,
<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>
according as the little one is a boy or a girl. A pretence
is made of catching the representative of the spirit, and
dragging him or her to the hut of the child's parents. Outside
the hut the pretended spirit takes his seat and the skin
of an animal is thrown over him. He then washes his
hands in a vessel of water, eats some millet-porridge, and
washes it down with beer. Meantime the women and girls
dance gleefully round him, screaming or singing, and throw
copper rings, beads, and so forth as presents into the vessel
of water. The men do the same, but without dancing; after
that they enter the hut to partake of a feast. The representative
of the ancestral spirit now vanishes, and the child
thenceforth bears his or her name.<note place='foot'>C. Mauch, <hi rend='italic'>Reisen im Inneren von
Süd-Afrika</hi> (Gotha, 1874), p. 43
(<hi rend='italic'>Petermann's Mittheilungen, Ergänsungsheft</hi>,
No. 37).</note> This ceremony may be
intended to represent the reincarnation of the ancestral spirit
in the child.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Revival of
the names
of the dead
among the
Nicobarese
and
Gilyaks.</note>
In the Nicobar Islands the names of dead relatives are
tabooed for a generation; but when both their parents are
dead, men and women are bound to assume the names of
their deceased grandfathers or grandmothers respectively.<note place='foot'>Sir R. C. Temple, in <hi rend='italic'>Census of
India, 1901</hi>, vol. iii. 207, 212.</note>
Perhaps with the names they may be thought to inherit
the spirits of their ancestors. Among the Tartars in the
Middle Ages the names of the dead might not be uttered till
the third generation.<note place='foot'>Plan de Carpin (de Plano Carpini),
<hi rend='italic'>Relation des Mongols ou Tartares</hi>, ed.
D'Avezac, cap. iii. § iii. The writer's
statement (<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>nec nomen proprium ejus
usque ad tertiam generationem audet
aliquis nominare</foreign></q>) is not very clear.</note> Among the Gilyaks of Saghalien no
two persons in the same tribe may bear the same name at
the same time; for they think that if a child were to receive
the name of a living man, either the child or the man would
die within the year. When a man dies, his name may not
be uttered until after the celebration of the festival at which
they sacrifice a bear for the purpose of procuring plenty of
game and fish. At that festival they call out the name of
the deceased while they beat the skin of the bear. Thenceforth
the name may be pronounced by every one, and it will
be bestowed on a child who shall afterwards be born.<note place='foot'>P. Labbé, <hi rend='italic'>Un Bagne russe, l'île
de Sakhaline</hi> (Paris, 1903), p. 166.</note> These
customs suggest that the Gilyaks, like other peoples, suppose
<pb n='371'/><anchor id='Pg371'/>
the namesake of a deceased person to be his or her reincarnation;
for their objection to let two living persons bear the
same name seems to imply a belief that the soul goes with
the name, and therefore cannot be shared by two people at
the same time.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Namesakes
of the dead
treated as
the dead
in person
among the
Esquimaux
of Bering
Strait.</note>
Among the Esquimaux of Bering Strait the first child
born in a village after some one has died receives the dead
person's name, and must represent him in subsequent
festivals which are given in his honour. The day before the
great feast of the dead the nearest male relative of the
deceased goes to the grave and plants before it a stake
bearing the crest or badge of the departed. This is the
notice served to the ghost to attend the festival. Accordingly
he returns from the spirit-land to the grave. Afterwards
a song is sung at the grave inviting the ghost to repair to the
assembly-house, where the people are gathered to celebrate
the festival. The shade accepts the invitation and takes
his place, with the other ghosts, in the fire-pit under the
floor of the assembly-house. All the time of the festival,
which lasts for several days, lamps filled with seal-oil are
kept burning day and night in the assembly-house in order
to light up the path to the spirit-land and enable the ghosts
to find their way back to their old haunts on earth. When
the spirits of the dead are gathered in the pit, and the
proper moment has come, they all rise up through the floor
and enter the bodies of their living namesakes. Offerings of
food, drink, and clothes are now made to these namesakes, who
eat and drink and wear the clothes on behalf of the ghosts.
Finally, the shades, refreshed and strengthened by the
banquet, are sent away back to their graves thinly clad in
the spiritual essence of the clothes, while the gross material
substance of the garments is retained by their namesakes.<note place='foot'>E. W. Nelson, <q>The Eskimo
about Bering Strait,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Eighteenth
Annual Report of the Bureau of
American Ethnology</hi>, part i. (Washington,
1899), pp. 363 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 365, 368,
371, 377, 379, 424 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Here the reincarnation of the dead in the living is not
permanent, but merely occasional and temporary. Still a
special connexion may well be thought to subsist at all times
between the deceased and the living person who bears his or
her name.
</p>

<pb n='372'/><anchor id='Pg372'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremonies
at the
naming of
children are
probably
often
associated
with the
idea of
rebirth.</note>
The foregoing facts seem to render it probable that
even where a belief in the reincarnation of ancestors either is
not expressly attested or has long ceased to form part of
the popular creed, many of the solemnities which attend
the naming of children may have sprung originally from
the widespread notion that the souls of the dead come to
life again in their namesakes.<note place='foot'>On the doctrine of the reincarnation
of ancestors in their descendants see
E. B. Tylor, <hi rend='italic'>Primitive Culture</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> ii. 3-5,
who observes with great probability
that <q>among the lower races generally
the renewal of old family names by
giving them to new-born children may
always be suspected of involving some
such thought.</q> See further <hi rend='italic'>Totemism
and Exogamy</hi>, iii. 297-299.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sometimes
the names
of the dead
may be pronounced
after their
bodies have
decayed. Arunta
practice of
chasing the
ghost into
the grave
at the end
of the
period of
mourning.</note>
In some cases the period during which the name of the
deceased may not be pronounced seems to bear a close
relation to the time during which his mortal remains may
be supposed still to hold together. Thus, of some Indian
tribes on the north-west coast of America it is said that
they may not speak the name of a dead person <q>until the
bones are finally disposed of.</q><note place='foot'>H. H. Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>Native Races of
the Pacific States</hi>, i. 248.</note> Among the Narrinyeri of
South Australia the name might not be uttered until the
corpse had decayed.<note place='foot'>G. Taplin, in <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of
South Australia</hi>, p. 19.</note> In the Encounter Bay tribe of the
same country the dead body is dried over a fire, packed up
in mats, and carried about for several months among the
scenes which had been familiar to the deceased in his life.
Next it is placed on a platform of sticks and left there till it
has completely decayed, whereupon the next of kin takes the
skull and uses it as a drinking-cup. After that the name of
the departed may be uttered without offence. Were it pronounced
sooner his kinsmen would be deeply offended, and
a war might be the result.<note place='foot'>H. E. A. Meyer, in <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes
of South Australia</hi>, p. 199.</note> The rule that the name of the
dead may not be spoken until his body has mouldered
away seems to point to a belief that the spirit continues to
exist only so long as the body does so, and that, when the
material frame is dissolved, the spiritual part of the man
perishes with it, or goes away, or at least becomes so feeble
and incapable of mischief that his name may be bandied
about with impunity.<note place='foot'>Some of the Indians of Guiana
bring food and drink to their dead so
long as the flesh remains on the bones;
when it has mouldered away, they conclude that the man himself has departed.
See A. Biet, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage de la France équinoxiale
en l'Isle de Cayenne</hi> (Paris, 1664),
p. 392. The Alfoors or Toradjas of
central Celebes believe that the souls of
the dead cannot enter the spirit-land
until all the flesh has been removed
from their bones; till that has been
done, the gods (<foreign rend='italic'>lamoa</foreign>) in the other
world could not bear the stench of the
corpse. Accordingly at a great festival
the bodies of all who have died within
a certain time are dug up and the
decaying flesh scraped from the bones.
See A. C. Kruijt, <q>Een en ander
aangaande het geestelijk en maatschappelijk
leven van den Poso-Alfoer,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege het
Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xxxix. (1895) pp. 26, 32 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<q>Het wezen van het Heidendom te
Posso,</q> <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> xlvii. (1903) p. 32. The
Matacos Indians of the Gran Chaco
believe that the soul of a dead man
does not pass down into the nether
world until his body is decomposed or
burnt. See J. Pelleschi, <hi rend='italic'>Los Indios
Matacos</hi> (Buenos Ayres, 1897), p. 102.
These ideas perhaps explain the widespread
custom of disinterring the dead
after a certain time and disposing of
their bones otherwise.</note> This view is to some extent confirmed
<pb n='373'/><anchor id='Pg373'/>
by the practice of the Arunta tribe in central
Australia. We have seen that among them no one may
mention the name of the deceased during the period of
mourning for fear of disturbing and annoying the ghost, who
is believed to be walking about at large. Some of the relations
of the dead man, it is true, such as his parents, elder brothers
and sisters, paternal aunts, mother-in-law, and all his sons-in-law,
whether actual or possible, are debarred all their lives
from taking his name into their lips; but other people,
including his wife, children, grandchildren, grandparents,
younger brothers and sisters, and father-in-law, are free to
name him so soon as he has ceased to walk the earth and
hence to be dangerous. Some twelve or eighteen months
after his death the people seem to think that the dead man
has enjoyed his liberty long enough, and that it is time to
confine his restless spirit within narrower bounds. Accordingly
a grand battue or ghost-hunt brings the days of
mourning to an end. The favourite haunt of the deceased
is believed to be the burnt and deserted camp where he died.
Here therefore on a certain day a band of men and women,
the men armed with shields and spear-throwers, assemble
and begin dancing round the charred and blackened remains
of the camp, shouting and beating the air with their weapons
and hands in order to drive away the lingering spirit from
the spot he loves too well. When the dancing is over, the
whole party proceed to the grave at a run, chasing the ghost
before them. It is in vain that the unhappy ghost makes a
last bid for freedom, and, breaking away from the beaters,
<pb n='374'/><anchor id='Pg374'/>
doubles back towards the camp; the leader of the party is
prepared for this manœuvre, and by making a long circuit
adroitly cuts off the retreat of the fugitive. Finally, having
run him to earth, they trample him down into the grave,
dancing and stamping on the heaped-up soil, while with
downward thrusts through the air they beat and force him
under ground. There, lying in his narrow house, flattened
and prostrate under a load of earth, the poor ghost sees his
widow wearing the gay feathers of the ring-neck parrot in
her hair, and he knows that the time of her mourning for
him is over. The loud shouts of the men and women shew
him that they are not to be frightened and bullied by him
any more, and that he had better lie quiet. But he may
still watch over his friends, and guard them from harm, and
visit them in dreams.<note place='foot'>Spencer and Gillen, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes
of Central Australia</hi>, pp. 498-508.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='4. Names of Kings and other Sacred Persons tabooed.'/>
<head>§ 4. Names of Kings and other Sacred Persons tabooed.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The birth-names
of
kings kept
secret or
not pronounced.</note>
When we see that in primitive society the names of
mere commoners, whether alive or dead, are matters of such
anxious care, we need not be surprised that great precautions
should be taken to guard from harm the names of
sacred kings and priests. Thus the name of the king of
Dahomey is always kept secret, lest the knowledge of it
should enable some evil-minded person to do him a mischief.
The appellations by which the different kings of
Dahomey have been known to Europeans are not their true
names, but mere titles, or what the natives call <q>strong
names</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>nyi-sese</foreign>). As a rule, these <q>strong names</q> are the
first words of sentences descriptive of certain qualities. Thus
Agaja, the name by which the fourth king of the dynasty
was known, was part of a sentence meaning, <q>A spreading
tree must be lopped before it can be cast into the fire</q>; and
Tegbwesun, the name of the fifth king, formed the first word
of a sentence which signified, <q>No one can take the cloth off
the neck of a wild bull.</q> The natives seem to think that no
harm comes of such titles being known, since they are not,
like the birth-names, vitally connected with their owners.<note place='foot'>A. B. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>The Ewe-speaking
Peoples of the Slave Coast</hi>, pp. 98 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
<pb n='375'/><anchor id='Pg375'/>
In the Galla kingdom of Ghera the birth-name of the
sovereign may not be pronounced by a subject under pain
of death, and common words which resemble it in sound are
changed for others. Thus when a queen named Carre reigned
over the kingdom, the word <foreign rend='italic'>hara</foreign>, which means smoke, was
exchanged for <foreign rend='italic'>unno</foreign>; further, <foreign rend='italic'>arre</foreign>, <q>ass,</q> was replaced by
<foreign rend='italic'>culula</foreign>; and <foreign rend='italic'>gudare</foreign>, <q>potato,</q> was dropped and <foreign rend='italic'>loccio</foreign> substituted
for it.<note place='foot'>A. Cecchi, <hi rend='italic'>Da Zeila alle frontiere
del Caffa</hi>, ii. (Rome, 1885) p. 551.</note> Among the Bahima of central Africa, when the
king dies, his name is abolished from the language, and if his
name was that of an animal, a new appellation must be
found for the creature at once. For example, the king is
often called a lion; hence at the death of a king named
Lion a new name for lions in general has to be coined.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <q>The Bahima,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Royal Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxxvii. (1907) p. 96.</note>
Thus in the language of the Bahima the word for <q>lion</q>
some years ago was <foreign rend='italic'>mpologoma</foreign>. But when a prominent
chief of that name died, the word for lion was changed to
<foreign rend='italic'>kichunchu</foreign>. Again, in the Bahima language the word for
<q>nine</q> used to be <foreign rend='italic'>mwenda</foreign>, a word which occurs with the
same meaning but dialectical variations in the languages of
other tribes of central and eastern Africa. But when a chief
who bore the name Mwenda died, the old name for <q>nine</q>
had to be changed, and accordingly the word <foreign rend='italic'>isaga</foreign> has been
substituted for it.<note place='foot'>J. F. Cunningham, <hi rend='italic'>Uganda and its
Peoples</hi> (London, 1905), pp. 14, 16.</note> In Siam it used to be difficult to ascertain
the king's real name, since it was carefully kept secret from fear
of sorcery; any one who mentioned it was clapped into gaol.
The king might only be referred to under certain high-sounding
titles, such as <q>the august,</q> <q>the perfect,</q> <q>the supreme,</q>
<q>the great emperor,</q> <q>descendant of the angels,</q> and so on.<note place='foot'>De la Loubere, <hi rend='italic'>Du royaume de
Siam</hi> (Amsterdam, 1691), i. 306;
Pallegoix, <hi rend='italic'>Royaume Thai ou Siam</hi>, i.
260.</note>
In Burma it was accounted an impiety of the deepest dye to
mention the name of the reigning sovereign; Burmese subjects,
even when they were far from their country, could not be
prevailed upon to do so;<note place='foot'>J. S. Polack, <hi rend='italic'>Manners and Customs
of the New Zealanders</hi> (London,
1840), ii. 127, note 43.</note> after his accession to the throne
the king was known by his royal titles only.<note place='foot'>A. Fytche, <hi rend='italic'>Burma Past and
Present</hi> (London, 1878), i. 238.</note> The proper
name of the Emperor of China may neither be pronounced
<pb n='376'/><anchor id='Pg376'/>
nor written by any of his subjects.<note place='foot'>J. Edkins, <hi rend='italic'>Religion in China</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(London, 1878), p. 35.</note> Coreans were formerly
forbidden, under severe penalties, to utter the king's name,
which, indeed, was seldom known.<note place='foot'>Ch. Dallet, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de l'Église
de Corée</hi>, i. p. xxiv.; Mrs. Bishop,
<hi rend='italic'>Korea and her Neighbours</hi> (London,
1898), i. 48. The custom is now
obsolete (G. N. Curzon, <hi rend='italic'>Problems of
the Far East</hi>, Westminster, 1896, p.
155 note).</note> When a prince ascends
the throne of Cambodia he ceases to be designated by his
real name; and if that name happens to be a common word
in the language, the word is often changed. Thus, for
example, since the reign of King Ang Duong the word
<foreign rend='italic'>duong</foreign>, which meant a small coin, has been replaced by <foreign rend='italic'>dom</foreign>.<note place='foot'>E. Aymonier, <hi rend='italic'>Notice sur le Cambodge</hi>
(Paris, 1875), p. 22; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Le
Cambodge</hi>, i. (Paris, 1900) p. 58.</note>
In the island of Sunda it is taboo to utter any word which
coincides with the name of a prince or chief.<note place='foot'>K. F. Holle, <q>Snippers van den
Regent van Galoeh,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor
Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>,
xxvii. (1882) p. 101.</note> The name of
the rajah of Bolang Mongondo, a district in the west of
Celebes, is never mentioned except in case of urgent
necessity, and even then his pardon must be asked repeatedly
before the liberty is taken.<note place='foot'>N. P. Wilken en J. A. Schwarz,
<q>Allerlei over het land en volk van
Bolaang Mongondou,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xi. (1867) p. 356.</note> In the island of Sumba
people do not mention the real name of a prince, but refer to
him by the name of the first slave whom in his youth he
became master of. This slave is regarded by the chief as
his second self, and he enjoys practical impunity for any
misdeeds he may commit.<note place='foot'>S. Roos, <q>Bijdrage tot de Kennis
van Taal, Land, en Volk op het eiland
Soemba,</q> p. 70, <hi rend='italic'>Verhandelingen van
het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten
en Wetenschappen</hi>, xxxvi. Compare
J. H. F. Kohlbrugge, <q>Naamgeving
in Insulinde,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de Taal-
Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsche-Indië</hi>,
ii. (1900) p. 173.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The names
of Zulu
kings and
chiefs may
not be pronounced.</note>
Among the Zulus no man will mention the name of the
chief of his tribe or the names of the progenitors of the chief,
so far as he can remember them; nor will he utter common
words which coincide with or merely resemble in sound
tabooed names. <q>As, for instance, the Zungu tribe say <foreign rend='italic'>mata</foreign>
for <foreign rend='italic'>manzi</foreign> (water), and <foreign rend='italic'>inkosta</foreign> for <foreign rend='italic'>tshanti</foreign> (grass), and <foreign rend='italic'>embigatdu</foreign>
for <foreign rend='italic'>umkondo</foreign> (assegai), and <foreign rend='italic'>inyatugo</foreign> for <foreign rend='italic'>enhlela</foreign> (path),
because their present chief is Umfan-o inhlela, his father was
Manzini, his grandfather Imkondo, and one before him
Tshani.</q> In the tribe of the Dwandwes there was a chief
<pb n='377'/><anchor id='Pg377'/>
called Langa, which means the sun; hence the name of the
sun was changed from <foreign rend='italic'>langa</foreign> to <foreign rend='italic'>gala</foreign>, and so remains to this
day, though Langa died more than a hundred years ago.
Once more, in the Xnumayo tribe the word meaning <q>to
herd cattle</q> was changed from <foreign rend='italic'>alusa</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>ayusa</foreign> to <foreign rend='italic'>kagesa</foreign>,
because u-Mayusi was the name of the chief. Besides these
taboos, which were observed by each tribe separately, all the
Zulu tribes united in tabooing the name of the king who
reigned over the whole nation. Hence, for example, when
Panda was king of Zululand, the word for <q>a root of a tree,</q>
which is <foreign rend='italic'>impando</foreign>, was changed to <foreign rend='italic'>nxabo</foreign>. Again, the word
for <q>lies</q> or <q>slander</q> was altered from <foreign rend='italic'>amacebo</foreign> to <foreign rend='italic'>amakwata</foreign>,
because <foreign rend='italic'>amacebo</foreign> contains a syllable of the name of the
famous King Cetchwayo. These substitutions are not, however,
carried so far by the men as by the women, who omit
every sound even remotely resembling one that occurs in a
tabooed name. At the king's kraal, indeed, it is sometimes
difficult to understand the speech of the royal wives, as they
treat in this fashion the names not only of the king and his
forefathers, but even of his and their brothers back for generations.
When to these tribal and national taboos we add
those family taboos on the names of connexions by marriage
which have been already described,<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> we can easily understand
how it comes about that in Zululand every tribe has
words peculiar to itself, and that the women have a considerable
vocabulary of their own. Members, too, of one
family may be debarred from using words employed by
those of another. The women of one kraal, for instance,
may call a hyaena by its ordinary name; those of the next
may use the common substitute; while in a third the substitute
may also be unlawful and another term may have to be
invented to supply its place. Hence the Zulu language at
the present day almost presents the appearance of being a
double one; indeed, for multitudes of things it possesses
three or four synonyms, which through the blending of tribes
are known all over Zululand.<note place='foot'>J. Shooter, <hi rend='italic'>The Kafirs of Natal
and the Zulu Country</hi>, pp. 221 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
David Leslie, <hi rend='italic'>Among the Zulus and
Amatongas</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Edinburgh, 1875), pp.
172-179; J. Macdonald, <q>Manners,
Customs, Superstitions, and Religions of
South African Tribes,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xx. (1891)
p. 131. The account in the text is based
mainly on Leslie's description, which is
by far the fullest.</note>
</p>

<pb n='378'/><anchor id='Pg378'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The names
of living
kings and
chiefs may
not be pronounced
in Madagascar.</note>
In Madagascar a similar custom everywhere prevails and
has resulted, as among the Zulus, in producing certain
dialectic differences in the speech of the various tribes.
There are no family names in Madagascar, and almost every
personal name is drawn from the language of daily life and
signifies some common object or action or quality, such as
a bird, a beast, a tree, a plant, a colour, and so on. Now,
whenever one of these common words forms the name or
part of the name of the chief of the tribe, it becomes sacred
and may no longer be used in its ordinary signification as
the name of a tree, an insect, or what not. Hence a new
name for the object must be invented to replace the one
which has been discarded. Often the new name consists of
a descriptive epithet or a periphrasis. Thus when the princess
Rabodo became queen in 1863 she took the name of
Rasoherina. Now <foreign rend='italic'>soherina</foreign> was the word for the silkworm
moth, but having been assumed as the name of the sovereign
it could no longer be applied to the insect, which ever since
has been called <foreign rend='italic'>zany-dandy</foreign>, <q>offspring of silk.</q> So, again,
if a chief had or took the name of an animal, say of the dog
(<foreign rend='italic'>amboa</foreign>), and was known as Ramboa, the animal would henceforth
be called by another name, probably a descriptive one,
such as <q>the barker</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>famovo</foreign>) or <q>the driver away</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>fandroaka</foreign>),
etc. In the western part of Imerina there was a
chief called Andria-mamba; but <foreign rend='italic'>mamba</foreign> was one of the
names of the crocodile, so the chiefs subjects might not call
the reptile by that name and were always scrupulous to use
another. It is easy to conceive what confusion and uncertainty
may thus be introduced into a language when it is
spoken by many little local tribes each ruled by a petty chief
with his own sacred name. Yet there are tribes and people
who submit to this tyranny of words as their fathers did
before them from time immemorial. The inconvenient results
of the custom are especially marked on the western
coast of the island, where, on account of the large number of
independent chieftains, the names of things, places, and
rivers have suffered so many changes that confusion often
arises, for when once common words have been banned by
<pb n='379'/><anchor id='Pg379'/>
the chiefs the natives will not acknowledge to have ever
known them in their old sense.<note place='foot'>D. Tyerman and G. Bennet,
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of Voyages and Travels</hi>
(London, 1831), ii. 525 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J.
Sibree, <hi rend='italic'>The Great African Island</hi>
(London, 1880), pp. 150 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<q>Curiosities of Words connected with
Royalty and Chieftainship,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Antananarivo
Annual and Madagascar
Magazine</hi>, No. xi. (Christmas, 1887)
pp. 308 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxi. (1887)
pp. 226 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> On the custom of
tabooing royal or chiefly names in
Madagascar, see A. van Gennep, <hi rend='italic'>Tabou
et totémisme à Madagascar</hi> (Paris,
1904), pp. 104 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The names
of dead
kings and
chiefs are
also
tabooed
in Madagascar.</note>
But it is not merely the names of living kings and chiefs
which are tabooed in Madagascar; the names of dead
sovereigns are equally under a ban, at least in some parts of
the island. Thus among the Sakalavas, when a king has
died, the nobles and people meet in council round the dead
body and solemnly choose a new name by which the
deceased monarch shall be henceforth known. The new
name always begins with <foreign rend='italic'>andrian</foreign>, <q>lord,</q> and ends with
<foreign rend='italic'>arrivou</foreign>, <q>thousand,</q> to signify that the late king ruled over
a numerous nation. The body of the name is composed of
an epithet or phrase descriptive of the deceased or of his
reign. After the new name has been adopted, the old name
by which the king was known during his life becomes sacred
and may not be pronounced under pain of death. Further,
words in the common language which bear any resemblance
to the forbidden name also become sacred and have to be
replaced by others. For example, after the death of King
Makka the word <foreign rend='italic'>laka</foreign>, which meant a canoe, was abandoned
and the word <foreign rend='italic'>fiounrâma</foreign> substituted for it. When Taoussi
died, the word <foreign rend='italic'>taoussi</foreign>, signifying <q>beautiful,</q> was replaced
by <foreign rend='italic'>senga</foreign>. For similar reasons the word <foreign rend='italic'>ântétsi</foreign>, <q>old,</q> was
changed for <foreign rend='italic'>matoué</foreign>, which properly means <q>ripe</q>; the word
<foreign rend='italic'>voûssi</foreign>, <q>castrated,</q> was dropped and <foreign rend='italic'>manapaka</foreign>, <q>cut,</q>
adopted in its place; and the word for island (<foreign rend='italic'>nossi</foreign>) was
changed into <foreign rend='italic'>varioû</foreign>, which signifies strictly <q>a place where
there is rice.</q> Again, when a Sakalava king named
Marentoetsa died, two words fell into disuse, namely, the
word <foreign rend='italic'>màry</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>màre</foreign> meaning <q>true,</q> and the word <foreign rend='italic'>toetsa</foreign>
meaning <q>condition.</q> Persons who uttered these forbidden
words were looked on not only as grossly rude, but even
as felons; they had committed a capital crime. However,
these changes of vocabulary are confined to the
<pb n='380'/><anchor id='Pg380'/>
district over which the deceased king reigned; in the
neighbouring districts the old words continue to be employed
in the old sense.<note place='foot'>V. Noel, <q>Île de Madagascar,
recherches sur les Sakkalava,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin
de la Société de Géographie</hi> (Paris), IIme
Série, xx. (1843) pp. 303-306. Compare
A. Grandidier, <q>Les Rites funéraires
chez les Malgaches,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue
d'Ethnographie</hi>, v. (1886) p. 224;
A. Walen, <q>The Sakalava,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Antananarivo
Annual and Madagascar Magazine</hi>,
vol. ii., Reprint of the Second
Four Numbers (Antananarivo, 1896),
p. 242; A. van Gennep, <hi rend='italic'>Tabou
et totémisme à Madagascar</hi>, pp. 110
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Amongst the Sakalavas it is
forbidden to mention the name of
any dead person. See A. Voeltzkow,
<q>Vom Morondava zum Mangoky,
Reiseskizzen aus West-Madagascar,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft für Erdkunde
zu Berlin</hi>, xxxi. (1896) p. 118.</note> Again, among the Bara, another
tribe of Madagascar, <q>the memory of their deceased kings
is held in the very highest respect; the name of such
kings is considered sacred&mdash;too sacred indeed for utterance,
and no one is allowed to pronounce it. To such a length
is this absurdity carried that the name of any person or
thing whatsoever, if it bear a resemblance to the name of
the deceased king, is no longer used, but some other
designation is given. For instance, there was a king named
Andriamasoandro. After his decease the word <foreign rend='italic'>masoandro</foreign>
was no longer employed as the name of the sun, but
<foreign rend='italic'>mahenika</foreign> was substituted for it.</q><note place='foot'>R. Baron, <q>The Bara,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Antananarivo
Annual and Madagascar Magazine</hi>,
vol. ii., Reprint of the Second Four
Numbers (Antananarivo, 1896), p. 83.</note> An eminent authority on
Madagascar has observed: <q>A curious fact, which has had
a very marked influence on the Malagasy language, is the
custom of no longer pronouncing the name of a dead person
nor even the words which resemble it in their conclusions.
The name is replaced by another. King Ramitra, since his
decease, has been called Mahatenatenarivou, 'the prince who
has conquered a thousand foes,' and a Malagasy who should
utter his old name would be regarded as the murderer of the
prince, and would therefore be liable to the confiscation of
his property, or even to the penalty of death. It is easy
accordingly to understand how the Malagasy language, one
in its origin, has been corrupted, and how it comes about that
at the present day there are discrepancies between the
various dialects. In Menabe, since the death of King
Vinany, the word <foreign rend='italic'>vilany</foreign>, meaning a pot, has been replaced
by <foreign rend='italic'>fiketrehane</foreign>, <q>cooking vessel,</q> whereas the old word continues
in use in the rest of Madagascar. These changes, it
<pb n='381'/><anchor id='Pg381'/>
is true, hardly take place except for kings and great
chiefs.</q><note place='foot'>A. Grandidier, <q>Madagascar,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</hi>
(Paris), Vme Série, xvii. (1869) pp.
401 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The writer is here speaking
specially of the Sakalavas, though his
remarks appear to be of general
application.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The names
of chiefs
may not
be pronounced
in
Polynesia.</note>
The sanctity attributed to the persons of chiefs in Polynesia
naturally extended also to their names, which on the
primitive view are hardly separable from the personality of
their owners. Hence in Polynesia we find the same systematic
prohibition to utter the names of chiefs or of common
words resembling them which we have already met with in
Zululand and Madagascar. Thus in New Zealand the name
of a chief is held so sacred that, when it happens to be a
common word, it may not be used in the language, and
another has to be found to replace it. For example, a chief
to the southward of East Cape bore the name of Maripi,
which signified a knife, hence a new word (<foreign rend='italic'>nekra</foreign>) for knife
was introduced, and the old one became obsolete. Elsewhere
the word for water (<foreign rend='italic'>wai</foreign>) had to be changed, because
it chanced to be the name of the chief, and would have been
desecrated by being applied to the vulgar fluid as well as to
his sacred person. This taboo naturally produced a plentiful
crop of synonyms in the Maori language, and travellers
newly arrived in the country were sometimes puzzled at finding
the same things called by quite different names in neighbouring
tribes.<note place='foot'>J. S. Polack, <hi rend='italic'>Manners and Customs
of the New Zealanders</hi>, i. 37 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
ii. 126 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare E. Tregear,
<q>The Maoris of New Zealand,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xix. (1890) p. 123.</note> When a king comes to the throne in
Tahiti, any words in the language that resemble his name in
sound must be changed for others. In former times, if any
man were so rash as to disregard this custom and to use the
forbidden words, not only he but all his relations were
immediately put to death.<note place='foot'>Captain J. Cook, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages</hi> (London,
1809), vi. 155 (Third Voyage). Compare
Captain James Wilson, <hi rend='italic'>Missionary
Voyage to the Southern Pacific Ocean</hi>
(London, 1799), p. 366; W. Ellis,
<hi rend='italic'>Polynesian Researches</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> iii. 101.</note> On the accession of King Otoo,
which happened before Vancouver's visit to Tahiti, the
proper names of all the chiefs were changed, as well as forty
or fifty of the commonest words in the language, and every
native was obliged to adopt the new terms, for any neglect
<pb n='382'/><anchor id='Pg382'/>
to do so was punished with the greatest severity.<note place='foot'>Vancouver, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage of Discovery to
the North Pacific Ocean and round the
World</hi> (London, 1798), i. 135.</note> When
a certain king named Tu came to the throne of Tahiti the
word <foreign rend='italic'>tu</foreign>, which means <q>to stand,</q> was changed to <foreign rend='italic'>tia</foreign>; <foreign rend='italic'>fetu</foreign>,
<q>a star,</q> became <foreign rend='italic'>fetia</foreign>; <foreign rend='italic'>tui</foreign>, <q>to strike,</q> was turned into <foreign rend='italic'>tiai</foreign>,
and so on. Sometimes, as in these instances, the new names
were formed by merely changing or dropping some letter or
letters of the original words; in other cases the substituted
terms were entirely different words, whether chosen for their
similarity of meaning though not of sound, or adopted from
another dialect, or arbitrarily invented. But the changes
thus introduced were only temporary; on the death of the
king the new words fell into disuse, and the original ones
were revived.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>United States Exploring Expedition,
Ethnography and Philology</hi>, by
Horatio Hale (Philadelphia, 1846), pp.
288 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Similarly in Samoa, when the name of a
sacred chief was that of an animal or bird, the name of the
animal or bird was at once changed for another, and the old
one might never again be uttered in that chief's district.
For example, a sacred Samoan chief was named Pe'a, which
means <q>flying-fox.</q> Hence in his district a flying-fox was
no longer called a flying-fox but a <q>bird of heaven</q>
(<foreign rend='italic'>manu langi</foreign>).<note place='foot'>G. Brown, D.D., <hi rend='italic'>Melanesians and
Polynesians</hi> (London, 1910), p. 280.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The names
of the
Eleusinian
priests
might not
be uttered.</note>
In ancient Greece the names of the priests and other
high officials who had to do with the performances of the
Eleusinian mysteries might not be uttered in their lifetime.
To pronounce them was a legal offence. The pedant in
Lucian tells how he fell in with these august personages
hailing along to the police court a ribald fellow who had
dared to name them, though well he knew that ever since
their consecration it was unlawful to do so, because they had
become anonymous, having lost their old names and acquired
new and sacred titles.<note place='foot'>Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>Lexiphanes</hi>, 10. The inscriptional
and other evidence of this
Greek superstition was first brought to
the notice of anthropologists by Mr.
W. R. Paton in an interesting article,
<q>The Holy Names of the Eleusinian
Priests,</q> <hi rend='italic'>International Folk-lore Congress,
1891, Papers and Transactions</hi>,
pp. 202-214. Compare E. Maass,
<hi rend='italic'>Orpheus</hi> (Munich, 1895), p. 70; Aug.
Mommsen, <hi rend='italic'>Feste der Stadt Athen im Altertum</hi>
(Leipsic, 1898), pp. 253-255; P.
Foucart, <hi rend='italic'>Les Grands Mystères d'Eleusis</hi>
(Paris, 1900), pp. 28-31. The two last
writers shew that, contrary to what
we might have expected, the custom
appears not to have been very ancient.</note> From two inscriptions found at
<pb n='383'/><anchor id='Pg383'/>
Eleusis it appears that the names of the priests were
committed to the depths of the sea;<note place='foot'>G. Kaibel, <hi rend='italic'>Epigrammata Graeca ex
lapidibus conlecta</hi>, No. 863; Ἐφημερὶς ἀρχαιολογική,
1883, col. 79 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> From
the latter of these inscriptions we learn
that the name might be made public
after the priest's death. Further, a
reference of Eunapius (<hi rend='italic'>Vitae sophistarum</hi>,
p. 475 of the Didot edition)
shews that the name was revealed to
the initiated. In the essay cited in the
preceding note Mr. W. R. Paton assumes
that it was the new and sacred
name which was kept secret and committed
to the sea. The case is not
clear, but both the evidence and the
probability seem to me in favour of the
view that it was rather the old everyday
name of the priest or priestess which
was put away at his or her consecration.
If, as is not improbable, these sacred
personages had to act the parts of gods
and goddesses at the mysteries, it might
well be deemed indecorous and even
blasphemous to recall the vulgar names
by which they had been known in the
familiar intercourse of daily life. If
our clergy, to suppose an analogous
case, had to personate the most exalted
beings of sacred history, it would surely
be grossly irreverent to address them
by their ordinary names during the
performance of their solemn functions.</note> probably they were
engraved on tablets of bronze or lead, which were then
thrown into deep water in the Gulf of Salamis. The intention
doubtless was to keep the names a profound secret;
and how could that be done more surely than by sinking
them in the sea? what human vision could spy them
glimmering far down in the dim depths of the green
water? A clearer illustration of the confusion between the
incorporeal and the corporeal, between the name and its
material embodiment, could hardly be found than in this
practice of civilised Greece.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The old
names of
members of
the Yewe
order in
Togo may
not be
uttered.</note>
In Togo, a district of West Africa, a secret religious
society flourishes under the name of the Yewe order. Both
men and women are admitted to it. The teaching and
practice of the order are lewd and licentious. Murderers
and debtors join it for the sake of escaping from justice, for
the members are not amenable to the laws. On being
initiated every one receives a new name, and thenceforth his
or her old name may never be mentioned by anybody under
penalty of a heavy fine. Should the old name be uttered in
a quarrel by an uninitiated person, the aggrieved party, who
seems to be oftener a woman than a man, pretends to fall
into a frenzy, and in this state rushes into the house of the
offender, smashes his pots, destroys the grass roof, and tears
down the fence. Then she runs away into the forest, where
the simple people believe that she is changed into a leopard.
In truth she slinks by night into the conventual buildings of
<pb n='384'/><anchor id='Pg384'/>
the order, and is there secretly kept in comfort till the
business is settled. At last she is publicly brought back by
the society with great pomp, her body smeared with red
earth and adorned with an artificial tail in order to make
the ignorant think that she has really been turned into a
leopard.<note place='foot'>H. Seidel, <q>Der Yew'e Dienst im
Togolande,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für afrikanische
und oceanische Sprachen</hi>, iii.
(1897) pp. 161-173; H. Klose, <hi rend='italic'>Togo
unter deutscher Flagge</hi> (Berlin, 1899),
pp. 197-205. Compare Lieut. Herold,
<q>Bericht betreffend religiöse Anschauungen
und Gebräuche der deutschen
Ewe-Neger,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen aus den
deutschen Schutzgebieten</hi>, v. (1892) p.
146; J. Spieth, <q>Der Jehve Dienst
der Evhe-Neger,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen der
Geographischen Gesellschaft zu Jena</hi>,
xii. (1893) pp. 83-88; C. Spiess,
<q>Religionsbegriffe der Evheer in Westafrika,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen des Seminars
für orientalische Sprachen zu Berlin</hi>,
vi. (1903) Dritte Abtheilung, p. 126.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The utterance
of the
names of
gods and
spirits is
supposed
to disturb
the course
of nature.</note>
When the name is held to be a vital part of the person,
it is natural to suppose that the mightier the person the
more potent must be his name. Hence the names of supernatural
beings, such as gods and spirits, are commonly
believed to be endowed with marvellous virtues, and the
mere utterance of them may work wonders and disturb the
course of nature. The Warramunga of central Australia
believe in a formidable but mythical snake called the
Wollunqua, which lives in a pool. When they speak of it
amongst themselves they designate it by another name,
because they say that, were they to call the snake too often
by its real name, they would lose control over the creature,
and it would come out of the water and eat them all up.<note place='foot'>Spencer and Gillen, <hi rend='italic'>Northern
Tribes of Central Australia</hi>, p. 227.</note>
For this reason, too, the sacred books of the Mongols,
which narrate the miraculous deeds of the divinities, are
allowed to be read only in spring or summer; because at
other seasons the reading of them would bring on tempests
or snow.<note place='foot'>G. Timkowski, <hi rend='italic'>Travels of the
Russian Mission through Mongolia to
China</hi> (London, 1827), ii. 348.</note> When Mr. Campbell was travelling with some
Bechuanas, he asked them one morning after breakfast to
tell him some of their stories, but they informed him that
were they to do so before sunset, the clouds would fall from
the heavens upon their heads.<note place='foot'>J. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in South
Africa, Second Journey</hi> (London, 1822),
ii. 204 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Sulka of New Britain
believe in a certain hostile spirit named Kot, to whose wrath
they attribute earthquakes, thunder, and lightning. Among
<pb n='385'/><anchor id='Pg385'/>
the things which provoke his vengeance is the telling of
tales and legends by day; stories should be told only at
evening or night.<note place='foot'>P. Rascher, <q>Die Sulka, ein Beitrag
zur Ethnographie Neu-Pommern,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Archiv für Anthropologie</hi>, xxix. (1904)
p. 216. Compare R. Parkinson,
<hi rend='italic'>Dreissig Jahre in der Südsee</hi>, p. 198.</note> Most of the rites of the Navajo
Indians may be celebrated only in winter, when the thunder
is silent and the rattlesnakes are hibernating. Were they
to tell of their chief gods or narrate the myths of the
days of old at any other time, the Indians believe that they
would soon be killed by lightning or snake-bites. When Dr.
Washington Matthews was in New Mexico, he often employed
as his guide and informant a liberal-minded member
of the tribe who had lived with Americans and Mexicans
and seemed to be free from the superstitions of his fellows.
<q>On one occasion,</q> says Dr. Matthews, <q>during the month
of August, in the height of the rainy season, I had him in my
study conversing with him. In an unguarded moment, on
his part, I led him into a discussion about the gods of his
people, and neither of us had noticed a heavy storm coming
over the crest of the Zuñi mountains, close by. We were just
talking of Estsanatlehi, the goddess of the west, when the
house was shaken by a terrific peal of thunder. He rose at
once, pale and evidently agitated, and, whispering hoarsely,
<q>Wait till Christmas; they are angry,</q> he hurried away. I
have seen many such evidences of the deep influence of this
superstition on them.</q><note place='foot'>Washington Matthews, <q>The
Mountain Chant, a Navajo Ceremony,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Fifth Annual Report of the Bureau
of Ethnology</hi> (Washington, 1887), pp.
386 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among the Iroquois the rehearsal
of tales of wonder formed the chief entertainment at the
fireside in winter. But all the summer long, from the
time when the trees began to bud in spring till the
red leaves of autumn began to fall, these marvellous
stories were hushed and historical traditions took their
place.<note place='foot'>L. H. Morgan, <hi rend='italic'>League of the Iroquois</hi>
(Rochester, U.S., 1851), pp.
167 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The writer derives the prohibition
to tell tales of wonder in
summer <q>from a vague and indefinable
dread.</q></note> Other Indian tribes also will only tell their
mythic tales in winter, when the snow lies like a pall on
the ground, and lakes and rivers are covered with sheets of
ice; for then the spirits underground cannot hear the stories
in which their names are made free with by merry groups
<pb n='386'/><anchor id='Pg386'/>
gathered round the fire.<note place='foot'>H. R. Schoolcraft, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes</hi>,
iii. 314, 492.</note> The Yabims of German New
Guinea tell their magical tales especially at the time when
the yams have been gathered and are stored in the houses.
Such tales are told at evening by the light of the fire to a
circle of eager listeners, the narrative being broken from
time to time with a song in which the hearers join. The
telling of these stories is believed to promote the growth of
the crops. Hence each tale ends with a wish that there may
be many yams, that the taro may be big, the sugar-cane
thick, and the bananas long.<note place='foot'>K. Vetter, in <hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen der
Geographischen Gesellschaft zu Jena</hi>,
xii. (1893) p. 95; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Komm herüber
und hilf uns!</hi> ii. (Barmen, 1898) p.
26; B. Hagen, <hi rend='italic'>Unter den Papuas</hi>
(Wiesbaden, 1898), p. 270. On myths
or magical tales told as spells to produce
the effects which they describe,
compare F. Kauffmann, <hi rend='italic'>Balder</hi> (Strasburg,
1902), pp. 299 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; C. Fossey,
<hi rend='italic'>La Magie assyrienne</hi> (Paris, 1902),
pp. 95-97.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Winter and
summer
names of
the Kwakiutl
Indians.</note>
Among the Kwakiutl Indians of British Columbia the
superstition about names has affected in a very curious way
the social structure of the tribe. The nobles have two
different sets of names, one for use in winter and the other
in summer. Their winter names are those which were given
them at initiation by their guardian spirits, and as these
spirits appear to their devotees only in winter, the names
which they bestowed on the Indians may not be pronounced
in summer. Conversely the summer names may not be
used in winter. The change from summer to winter names
takes place from the moment when the spirits are supposed
to be present, and it involves a complete transformation of
the social system; for whereas during summer the people
are grouped in clans, in winter they are grouped in societies,
each society consisting of all persons who have been initiated
by the same spirit and have received from him the same
magical powers. Thus among these Indians the fundamental
constitution of society changes with the seasons: in
summer it is organised on a basis of kin, in winter on a basis
of spiritual affinity: for one half the year it is civil, for the
other half religious.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, <q>The Social Organization
and the Secret Societies of the Kwakiutl
Indians,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Report of the U.S. National
Museum for 1895</hi>, pp. 396, 418 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
503, 504. Compare <hi rend='italic'>Totemism and
Exogamy</hi>, iii. 333 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 517 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='387'/><anchor id='Pg387'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='5. Names of Gods tabooed.'/>
<head>§ 5. Names of Gods tabooed.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Names of
gods kept
secret.
How Isis
discovered
the name
of Ra, the
sun-god.</note>
Primitive man creates his gods in his own image.
Xenophanes remarked long ago that the complexion of negro
gods was black and their noses flat; that Thracian gods
were ruddy and blue-eyed; and that if horses, oxen, and
lions only believed in gods and had hands wherewith to
portray them, they would doubtless fashion their deities in
the form of horses, and oxen, and lions.<note place='foot'>Xenophanes, quoted by Eusebius,
<hi rend='italic'>Praeparatio Evangelii</hi>, xiii. 13, pp. 269
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ed. Heinichen, and by Clement
of Alexandria, <hi rend='italic'>Strom.</hi> vii. 4, pp. 840
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ed. Potter; H. Diels, <hi rend='italic'>Die Fragmente
der Vorsokratiker</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Berlin, 1906-1910),
i. 49.</note> Hence just as the
furtive savage conceals his real name because he fears that
sorcerers might make an evil use of it, so he fancies that his
gods must likewise keep their true names secret, lest other
gods or even men should learn the mystic sounds and thus
be able to conjure with them. Nowhere was this crude
conception of the secrecy and magical virtue of the divine
name more firmly held or more fully developed than in
ancient Egypt, where the superstitions of a dateless past were
embalmed in the hearts of the people hardly less effectually
than the bodies of cats and crocodiles and the rest of the
divine menagerie in their rock-cut tombs. The conception
is well illustrated by a story which tells how the subtle Isis
wormed his secret name from Ra, the great Egyptian god of
the sun. Isis, so runs the tale, was a woman mighty in
words, and she was weary of the world of men, and yearned
after the world of the gods. And she meditated in her
heart, saying, <q>Cannot I by virtue of the great name of Ra
make myself a goddess and reign like him in heaven and
earth?</q> For Ra had many names, but the great name which
gave him all power over gods and men was known to none but
himself. Now the god was by this time grown old; he
slobbered at the mouth and his spittle fell upon the ground.
So Isis gathered up the spittle and the earth with it, and
kneaded thereof a serpent and laid it in the path where the
great god passed every day to his double kingdom after his
heart's desire. And when he came forth according to his
wont, attended by all his company of gods, the sacred serpent
<pb n='388'/><anchor id='Pg388'/>
stung him, and the god opened his mouth and cried, and
his cry went up to heaven. And the company of gods cried,
<q>What aileth thee?</q> and the gods shouted, <q>Lo and behold!</q>
But he could not answer; his jaws rattled, his limbs shook,
the poison ran through his flesh as the Nile floweth over the
land. When the great god had stilled his heart, he cried to
his followers, <q>Come to me, O my children, offspring of my
body. I am a prince, the son of a prince, the divine seed of
a god. My father devised my name; my father and my
mother gave me my name, and it remained hidden in my
body since my birth, that no magician might have magic
power over me. I went out to behold that which I have
made, I walked in the two lands which I have created, and
lo! something stung me. What it was, I know not. Was
it fire? was it water? My heart is on fire, my flesh
trembleth, all my limbs do quake. Bring me the children
of the gods with healing words and understanding lips, whose
power reacheth to heaven.</q> Then came to him the children
of the gods, and they were very sorrowful. And Isis came
with her craft, whose mouth is full of the breath of life,
whose spells chase pain away, whose word maketh the dead
to live. She said, <q>What is it, divine Father? what is it?</q>
The holy god opened his mouth, he spake and said, <q>I went
upon my way, I walked after my heart's desire in the two
regions which I have made to behold that which I have
created, and lo! a serpent that I saw not stung me. Is it
fire? is it water? I am colder than water, I am hotter than
fire, all my limbs sweat, I tremble, mine eye is not steadfast,
I behold not the sky, the moisture bedeweth my face as in
summer-time.</q> Then spake Isis, <q>Tell me thy name, divine
Father, for the man shall live who is called by his name.</q>
Then answered Ra, <q>I created the heavens and the earth, I
ordered the mountains, I made the great and wide sea, I
stretched out the two horizons like a curtain. I am he who
openeth his eyes and it is light, and who shutteth them and
it is dark. At his command the Nile riseth, but the gods
know not his name. I am Khepera in the morning, I am
Ra at noon, I am Tum at eve.</q> But the poison was not
taken away from him; it pierced deeper, and the great god
could no longer walk. Then said Isis to him, <q>That was
<pb n='389'/><anchor id='Pg389'/>
not thy name that thou spakest unto me. Oh tell it me, that
the poison may depart; for he shall live whose name is
named.</q> Now the poison burned like fire, it was hotter
than the flame of fire. The god said, <q>I consent that Isis
shall search into me, and that my name shall pass from my
breast into hers.</q> Then the god hid himself from the gods,
and his place in the ship of eternity was empty. Thus was the
name of the great god taken from him, and Isis, the witch,
spake, <q>Flow away poison, depart from Ra. It is I, even I,
who overcome the poison and cast it to the earth; for the
name of the great god hath been taken away from him. Let
Ra live and let the poison die.</q> Thus spake great Isis, the
queen of the gods, she who knows Ra and his true name.<note place='foot'>A. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Ägypten und ägyptisches
Leben im Altertum</hi>, pp. 359-362;
A. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Die Religion
der alten Ägypter</hi>, pp. 29-32; G.
Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire ancienne des peuples
de l'Orient classique: les origines</hi>, pp.
162-164; R. V. Lanzone, <hi rend='italic'>Dizionario
di mitologia egizia</hi> (Turin, 1881-1884),
pp. 818-822; E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>The
Book of the Dead</hi> (London, 1895), pp.
lxxxix.-xci.; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Egyptian Magic</hi>, pp.
136 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Gods of the Egyptians</hi>
(London, 1904), i. 360 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The
abridged form of the story given in the
text is based on a comparison of these
various versions, of which Erman's is
slightly, and Maspero's much curtailed.
Mr. Budge's version is reproduced by Mr.
E. Clodd (<hi rend='italic'>Tom Tit Tot</hi>, pp. 180 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Egyptian
wizards
have
worked
enchantments
by
the names
of the gods
both in
ancient and
modern
times. Magical
constraint
exercised
over
demons
by means
of their
names in
North
Africa and
China.</note>
Thus we see that the real name of the god, with which
his power was inextricably bound up, was supposed to be
lodged, in an almost physical sense, somewhere in his breast,
from which it could be extracted by a sort of surgical operation
and transferred with all its supernatural powers to the
breast of another. In Egypt attempts like that of Isis to
appropriate the power of a high god by possessing herself
of his name were not mere legends told of the mythical
beings of a remote past; every Egyptian magician aspired
to wield like powers by similar means. For it was believed
that he who possessed the true name possessed the very
being of god or man, and could force even a deity to obey
him as a slave obeys his master. Thus the art of the
magician consisted in obtaining from the gods a revelation
of their sacred names, and he left no stone unturned to
accomplish his end. When once a god in a moment of
weakness or forgetfulness had imparted to the wizard the
wondrous lore, the deity had no choice but to submit
humbly to the man or pay the penalty of his contumacy.<note place='foot'>G. Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Études de mythologie
et d'archéologie égyptienne</hi> (Paris, 1893),
ii. 297 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
<pb n='390'/><anchor id='Pg390'/>
In one papyrus we find the god Typhon thus adjured: <q>I
invoke thee by thy true names, in virtue of which thou canst
not refuse to hear me</q>; and in another the magician threatens
Osiris that if the god does not do his bidding he will name
him aloud in the port of Busiris.<note place='foot'>E. Lefébure, <q>La Vertu et la vie
du nom en Égypte,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mélusine</hi>, viii.
(1897) coll. 227 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare A.
Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Ägypten und ägyptisches
Leben im Altertum</hi>, pp. 472 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. A.
Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Egyptian Magic</hi>, pp.
157 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> So in the Lucan the
Thessalian witch whom Sextus Pompeius consulted before
the battle of Pharsalia threatens to call up the Furies by
their real names if they will not do her bidding.<note place='foot'>Lucan, <hi rend='italic'>Pharsalia</hi>, vi. 730 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In modern
Egypt the magician still works his old enchantments by the
same ancient means; only the name of the god by which he
conjures is different. The man who knows <q>the most great
name</q> of God can, we are told, by the mere utterance of it
kill the living, raise the dead, transport himself instantly
wherever he pleases, and perform any other miracle.<note place='foot'>E. W. Lane, <hi rend='italic'>Manners and Customs
of the Ancient Egyptians</hi> (Paisley and
London, 1895), ch. xii. p. 273.</note>
Similarly among the Arabs of North Africa at the present
day <q>the power of the name is such that when one knows
the proper names the jinn can scarcely help answering the
call and obeying; they are the servants of the magical
names; in this case the incantation has a constraining
quality which is for the most part very strongly marked.
When Ibn el Hâdjdj et-Tlemsânî relates how the jinn
yielded up their secrets to him, he says, <q>I once met the
seven kings of the jinn in a cave and I asked them to teach
me the way in which they attack men and women, causing
them to fall sick, smiting them, paralysing them, and the
like. They all answered me: <q>If it were anybody but you
we would teach that to nobody, but you have discovered the
bonds, the spells, and the names which compel us; were it
not for the names by which you have constrained us, we
would not have answered to your call.</q></q></q><note place='foot'>E. Doutté, <hi rend='italic'>Magie et religion dans
l'Afrique du nord</hi>, p. 130.</note> So, too, <q>the
Chinese of ancient times were dominated by the notion that
beings are intimately associated with their names, so that a
man's knowledge of the name of a spectre might enable him
to exert power over the latter and to bend it to his will.</q><note place='foot'>J. J. M. de Groot, <hi rend='italic'>The Religious
System of China</hi>, vi. (Leyden, 1910)
p. 1126.</note>
</p>

<pb n='391'/><anchor id='Pg391'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Divine
names used
by the
Romans to
conjure
with.</note>
The belief in the magic virtue of divine names was
shared by the Romans. When they sat down before a city,
the priests addressed the guardian deity of the place in a
set form of prayer or incantation, inviting him to abandon
the beleaguered city and come over to the Romans, who
would treat him as well as or better than he had ever
been treated in his old home. Hence the name of the
guardian deity of Rome was kept a profound secret, lest the
enemies of the republic might lure him away, even as the
Romans themselves had induced many gods to desert, like
rats, the falling fortunes of cities that had sheltered them in
happier days.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xxviii. 18;
Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi> iii. 9; Servius on
Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> ii. 351; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest.
Rom.</hi> 61. According to Servius (<hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>)
it was forbidden by the pontifical law
to mention any Roman god by his
proper name, lest it should be profaned.
Compare Festus, p. 106, ed.
C. O. Müller: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Indigetes dii quorum
nomina vulgari non licet</foreign>.</q> On the
other hand the Romans were careful,
for the sake of good omen, to choose
men with lucky names, like Valerius,
Salvius, Statorius, to open any enterprise
of moment, such as to lead the sacrificial
victims in a religious procession or to
be the first to answer to their names in
a levy or a census. See Cicero, <hi rend='italic'>De
divinatione</hi>, i. 45. 102 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Festus,
<hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Lacus Lucrinus,</q> p. 121, ed.
C. O. Müller; Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi>
xxviii. 22; Tacitus, <hi rend='italic'>Histor.</hi> iv. 53.</note> Nay, the real name, not merely of its
guardian deity, but of the city itself, was wrapt in mystery
and might never be uttered, not even in the sacred rites. A
certain Valerius Soranus, who dared to divulge the priceless
secret, was put to death or came to a bad end.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> iii. 65; Solinus,
i. 4 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> iii. 9, 3, and
5; Servius, on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> i. 277;
Joannes Lydus, <hi rend='italic'>De mensibus</hi>, iv. 50.</note> In like manner,
it seems, the ancient Assyrians were forbidden to mention
the mystic names of their cities;<note place='foot'>F. Fossey, <hi rend='italic'>La Magie assyrienne</hi>
(Paris, 1902), pp. 58, 95.</note> and down to modern
times the Cheremiss of the Caucasus keep the names of their
communal villages secret from motives of superstition.<note place='foot'>T. de Pauly, <hi rend='italic'>Description ethnographique
des peuples de la Russie</hi> (St.
Petersburg, 1862), <hi rend='italic'>Peuples ouralo-altaïques</hi>,
p. 24.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The taboos
on names
of kings
and commoners
are
alike in
origin.</note>
If the reader has had the patience to follow this long
and perhaps tedious examination of the superstitions attaching
to personal names, he will probably agree that the mystery
in which the names of royal personages are so often shrouded
is no isolated phenomenon, no arbitrary expression of courtly
servility and adulation, but merely the particular application
of a general law of primitive thought, which includes within
its scope common folk and gods as well as kings and priests.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='392'/><anchor id='Pg392'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='6. Common words tabooed.'/>
<head>§ 6. Common Words tabooed.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Common
words as
well as
personal
names
are often
tabooed
from superstitious
motives.</note>
But personal names are not the only words which
superstitious fears have banished from everyday use. In
many cases similar motives forbid certain persons at certain
times to call common things by common names, thus obliging
them either to refrain from mentioning these things altogether
or to designate them by special terms or phrases reserved
for such occasions. A consideration of these cases follows
naturally on an examination of the taboos imposed upon
personal names; for personal names are themselves very
often ordinary terms of the language, so that an embargo
laid on them necessarily extends to many expressions current
in the commerce of daily life. And though a survey of
some of the interdicts on common words is not strictly
necessary for our immediate purpose, it may serve usefully
to complete our view of the transforming influence which
superstition has exercised on language. I shall make no
attempt to subject the examples to a searching analysis or
a rigid classification, but will set them down as they come
in a rough geographical order. And since my native land
furnishes as apt instances of the superstition as any other,
we may start on our round from Scotland.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Common
words
tabooed by
Highland
fowlers
and
fishermen.</note>
In the Atlantic Ocean, about six leagues to the west of
Gallon Head in the Lewis, lies a small group of rocky islets
known as the Flannan Islands. Sheep and wild fowl are
now their only inhabitants, but remains of what are described
as Druidical temples and the title of the Sacred Isles given
them by Buchanan suggest that in days gone by piety or
superstition may have found a safe retreat from the turmoil
of the world in these remote solitudes, where the dashing of
the waves and the strident scream of the sea-birds are almost
the only sounds that break the silence. Once a year, in
summer-time, the inhabitants of the adjacent lands of the
Lewis, who have a right to these islands, cross over to them
to fleece their sheep and kill the wild fowl for the sake both
of their flesh and their feathers. They regard the islands as
invested with a certain sanctity, and have been heard to say
that none ever yet landed in them but found himself more
<pb n='393'/><anchor id='Pg393'/>
disposed to devotion there than anywhere else. Accordingly
the fowlers who go thither are bound, during the whole of
the time that they ply their business, to observe very punctiliously
certain quaint customs, the transgression of which
would be sure, in their opinion, to entail some serious inconvenience.
When they have landed and fastened their boat
to the side of a rock, they clamber up into the island by a
wooden ladder, and no sooner are they got to the top, than
they all uncover their heads and make a turn sun-ways round
about, thanking God for their safety. On the biggest of the
islands are the ruins of a chapel dedicated to St. Flannan.
When the men come within about twenty paces of the altar,
they all strip themselves of their upper garments at once and
betake themselves to their devotions, praying thrice before
they begin fowling. On the first day the first prayer is
offered as they advance towards the chapel on their knees;
the second is said as they go round the chapel; and the
third is said in or hard by the ruins. They also pray thrice
every evening, and account it unlawful to kill a fowl after
evening prayers, as also to kill a fowl at any time with a
stone. Another ancient custom forbids the crew to carry
home in the boat any suet of the sheep they slaughter in
the islands, however many they may kill. But what here
chiefly concerns us is that so long as they stay on the islands
they are strictly forbidden to use certain common words, and
are obliged to substitute others for them. Thus it is absolutely
unlawful to call the island of St. Kilda, which lies
thirty leagues to the southward, by its proper Gaelic name
of Hirt; they must call it only <q>the high country.</q> They
may not so much as once name the islands in which they
are fowling by the ordinary name of Flannan; they must
speak only of <q>the country.</q> <q>There are several other
things that must not be called by their common names: <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>
<foreign rend='italic'>visk</foreign>, which in the language of the natives signifies water,
they call burn; a rock, which in their language is <foreign rend='italic'>creg</foreign>, must
here be called <foreign rend='italic'>cruey</foreign>, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> hard; shore in their language
expressed by <foreign rend='italic'>claddach</foreign>, must here be called <foreign rend='italic'>vah</foreign>, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> a cave;
sour in their language is expressed <foreign rend='italic'>gort</foreign>, but must here be
called <foreign rend='italic'>gaire</foreign>, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> sharp; slippery, which is expressed <foreign rend='italic'>bog</foreign>,
must be called soft; and several other things to this
<pb n='394'/><anchor id='Pg394'/>
purpose.</q><note place='foot'>M. Martin, <q>Description of the
Western Islands of Scotland,</q> in
Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, iii.
579 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> As to the Flannan Islands
see also Sir J. Sinclair's <hi rend='italic'>Statistical
Account of Scotland</hi>, xix. (Edinburgh,
1797), p. 283.</note> When Highlanders were in a boat at sea, whether
sailing or fishing, they were forbidden to call things by the
names by which they were known on land. Thus the boat-hook
should not be called a <foreign rend='italic'>croman</foreign>, but a <foreign rend='italic'>chliob</foreign>; a knife not <foreign rend='italic'>sgian</foreign>,
but <q>the sharp one</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>a ghiar</foreign>); a seal not <foreign rend='italic'>ròn</foreign>, but <q>the bald
beast</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>béisd mhaol</foreign>); a fox not <foreign rend='italic'>sionnach</foreign>, but <q>the red dog</q>
(<foreign rend='italic'>madadh ruadh</foreign>); the stone for anchoring the boat not <foreign rend='italic'>clach</foreign>,
but <q>hardness</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>cruaidh</foreign>). This practice now prevails much
more on the east coast than on the west, where it may be
said to be generally extinct. It is reported to be carefully
observed by the fishermen about the Cromarty Firth.<note place='foot'>J. G. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Superstitions of
the Highlands and Islands of Scotland</hi>
(Glasgow, 1900), p. 239.</note>
Among the words tabooed by fishermen in the north of
Scotland when they are at sea are minister, salmon, hare,
rabbit, rat, pig, and porpoise. At the present day if some
of the boats that come to the herring-fishing at Wick should
meet a salmon-boat from Reay in Caithness, the herring-men
will not speak to, nor even look at, the salmon-fishers.<note place='foot'>Miss Morag Cameron, <q>Highland
Fisher-folk and their Superstitions,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, xiv. (1903) p. 304.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Common
words
tabooed by
Scotch
fishermen
and others.</note>
When Shetland fishermen are at sea, they employ a
nomenclature peculiar to the occasion, and hardly anything
may be mentioned by its usual name. The substituted
terms are mostly of Norwegian origin, for the Norway
men were reported to be good fishers.<note place='foot'>A. Edmonston, <hi rend='italic'>Zetland Islands</hi>
(Edinburgh, 1809), ii. 74.</note> In setting their
lines the Shetland fishermen are bound to refer to certain
objects only by some special words or phrases. Thus a
knife is then called a <foreign rend='italic'>skunie</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>tullie</foreign>; a church becomes
<foreign rend='italic'>buanhoos</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>banehoos</foreign>; a minister is <foreign rend='italic'>upstanda</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>haydeen</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>prestingolva</foreign>; the devil is <foreign rend='italic'>da auld chield</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>da sorrow</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>da ill-healt</foreign>
(health), or <foreign rend='italic'>da black tief</foreign>; a cat is <foreign rend='italic'>kirser</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>fitting</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>vengla</foreign>, or
<foreign rend='italic'>foodin</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Ch. Rogers, <hi rend='italic'>Social Life in Scotland</hi>
(Edinburgh, 1884-1886), iii.
218.</note> On the north-east coast of Scotland there are some
villages, of which the inhabitants never pronounce certain
words and family names when they are at sea; each village
has its peculiar aversion to one or more of these words,
among which are <q>minister,</q> <q>kirk,</q> <q>swine,</q> <q>salmon,</q>
<pb n='395'/><anchor id='Pg395'/>
<q>trout,</q> and <q>dog.</q> When a church has to be referred to,
as often happens, since some of the churches serve as land-marks
to the fishermen at sea, it is spoken of as the <q>bell-hoose</q>
instead of the <q>kirk.</q> A minister is called <q>the
man wi' the black quyte.</q> It is particularly unlucky to
utter the word <q>sow</q> or <q>swine</q> or <q>pig</q> while the line is
being baited; if any one is foolish enough to do so, the line
is sure to be lost. In some villages on the coast of Fife a
fisherman who hears the ill-omened word spoken will cry out
<q>Cold iron.</q> In the village of Buckie there are some family
names, especially Ross, and in a less degree Coull, which no
fisherman will pronounce. If one of these names be mentioned
in the hearing of a fisherman, he spits or, as he calls
it, <q>chiffs.</q> Any one who bears the dreaded name is called
a <q>chiffer-oot,</q> and is referred to only by a circumlocution
such as <q>The man it diz so in so,</q> or <q>the laad it lives at
such and such a place.</q> During the herring-season men
who are unlucky enough to inherit the tabooed names have
little chance of being hired in the fishing-boats; and sometimes,
if they have been hired before their names were
known, they have been refused their wages at the end of the
season, because the boat in which they sailed had not been
successful, and the bad luck was set down to their presence
in it.<note place='foot'>W. Gregor, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore of the North-East
of Scotland</hi>, pp. 199-201.</note> Although in Scotland superstitions of this kind
appear to be specially incident to the callings of fishermen
and fowlers, other occupations are not exempt from them.
Thus in the Outer Hebrides the fire of a kiln is not called
fire (<foreign rend='italic'>teine</foreign>) but <foreign rend='italic'>aingeal</foreign>. Such a fire, it is said, is a dangerous
thing, and ought not to be referred to except by a euphemism.
<q>Evil be to him who called it fire or who named fire in the
kiln. It was considered the next thing to setting it on fire.</q><note place='foot'><q>Traditions, Customs, and Superstitions
of the Lewis,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, vi.
(1895) p. 170; Miss A. Goodrich-Freer,
<q>The Powers of Evil in the Outer
Hebrides,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, x. (1899) p. 265.</note>
Again, in some districts of Scotland a brewer would have
resented the use of the word <q>water</q> in reference to the
work in which he was engaged. <q>Water be your part of it,</q>
was the common retort. It was supposed that the use of
the word would spoil the brewing.<note place='foot'>J. Mackenzie, <hi rend='italic'>Ten Years north of
the Orange River</hi> (Edinburgh, 1871),
p. 151, note 1.</note> The Highlanders say
<pb n='396'/><anchor id='Pg396'/>
that when you meet a hobgoblin, and the fiend asks what is
the name of your dirk, you should not call it a dirk (<foreign rend='italic'>biodag</foreign>),
but <q>my father's sister</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>piuthar m'athar</foreign>) or <q>my grandmother's
sister</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>piuthar mo sheanamhair</foreign>) or by some similar
title. If you do not observe this precaution, the goblin will
lay such an enchantment on the blade that you will be unable
to stab him with it; the dirk will merely make a tinkling
noise against the soft impalpable body of the fiend.<note place='foot'>J. G. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Witchcraft and
Second Sight in the Highlands and
Islands of Scotland</hi> (Glasgow, 1902),
pp. 184 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Common
words,
especially
the names
of dangerous
animals,
tabooed in
various
parts of
Europe.</note>
Manx fishermen think it unlucky to mention a horse or
a mouse on board a fishing-boat.<note place='foot'>J. Rhys, <q>Manx Folk-lore and
Superstitions,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, iii. (1892)
p. 84.</note> The fishermen of Dieppe
on board their boats will not speak of several things, for
instance priests and cats.<note place='foot'>A. Bosquet, <hi rend='italic'>La Normandie romanesque
et merveilleuse</hi> (Paris and Rouen,
1845), p. 308.</note> German huntsmen, from motives
of superstition, call everything by names different from those
in common use.<note place='foot'>J. G. Gmelin, <hi rend='italic'>Reise durch Sibirien</hi>,
ii. (Göttingen, 1752), p. 277</note> In some parts of Bavaria the farmer will
not mention a fox by its proper name, lest his poultry-yard
should suffer from the ravages of the animal. So instead
of <foreign rend='italic'>Fuchs</foreign> he calls the beast <foreign rend='italic'>Loinl</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Henoloinl</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Henading</foreign>, or
<foreign rend='italic'>Henabou</foreign>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde
des Königreichs Bayern</hi>, ii. (Munich,
1863), p. 304.</note> In Prussia and Lithuania they say that in the
month of December you should not call a wolf a wolf but
<q>the vermin</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>das Gewürm</foreign>), otherwise you will be torn in
pieces by the werewolves.<note place='foot'>Tettau und Temme, <hi rend='italic'>Die Volkssagen
Ostpreussens, Litthauens und
Westpreussens</hi> (Berlin, 1837), p. 281.</note> In various parts of Germany it
is a rule that certain animals may not be mentioned by their
proper names in the mystic season between Christmas and
Twelfth Night. Thus in Thüringen they say that if you
would be spared by the wolves you must not mention their
name at this time.<note place='foot'>W. Witzschel, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten, und
Gebräuche aus Thüringen</hi>, p. 175, § 30.</note> In Mecklenburg people think that
were they to name a wolf on one of these days the animal
would appear. A shepherd would rather mention the devil
than the wolf at this season; and we read of a farmer who
had a bailiff named Wolf, but did not dare to call the
man by his name between Christmas and Twelfth Night,
referring to him instead as Herr Undeert (Mr. Monster).
<pb n='397'/><anchor id='Pg397'/>
In Quatzow, a village of Mecklenburg, there are many
animals whose common names are disused at this season
and replaced by others: thus a fox is called <q>long-tail,</q>
and a mouse <q>leg-runner</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>Boenlöper</foreign>). Any person who
disregards the custom has to pay a fine.<note place='foot'>K. Bartsch, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Märchen, und
Gebräuche aus Meklenburg</hi>, ii. p. 246,
§§ 1273, 1274.</note> In the Mark of
Brandenburg they say that between Christmas and Twelfth
Night you should not speak of mice as mice but as
<foreign rend='italic'>dinger</foreign>; otherwise the field-mice would multiply excessively.<note place='foot'>A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Märkische Sagen und
Märchen</hi>, p. 378, § 14.</note>
According to the Swedish popular belief, there are certain
animals which should never be spoken of by their proper
names, but must always be signified by euphemisms and
kind allusions to their character. Thus, if you speak slightingly
of the cat or beat her, you must be sure not to mention
her name; for she belongs to the hellish crew, and is a friend
of the mountain troll, whom she often visits. Great caution is
also needed in talking of the cuckoo, the owl, and the magpie,
for they are birds of witchery. The fox must be called
<q>blue-foot,</q> or <q>he that goes in the forest</q>; and rats are
<q>the long-bodied,</q> mice <q>the small grey,</q> and the seal
<q>brother Lars.</q> Swedish herd-girls, again, believe that if
the wolf and the bear be called by other than their proper
and legitimate names, they will not attack the herd. Hence
they give these brutes names which they fancy will not hurt
their feelings. The number of endearing appellations
lavished by them on the wolf is legion; they call him
<q>golden tooth,</q> <q>the silent one,</q> <q>grey legs,</q> and so on;
while the bear is referred to by the respectful titles of <q>the
old man,</q> <q>grandfather,</q> <q>twelve men's strength,</q> <q>golden
feet,</q> and more of the same sort. Even inanimate things
are not always to be called by their usual names. For
instance, fire is sometimes to be called <q>heat</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>hetta</foreign>) not
<foreign rend='italic'>eld</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>ell</foreign>; water for brewing must be called <foreign rend='italic'>lag</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>löu</foreign>, not
<foreign rend='italic'>vatn</foreign>, else the beer would not turn out so well.<note place='foot'>B. Thorpe, <hi rend='italic'>Northern Mythology</hi>,
ii. 83 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; L. Lloyd, <hi rend='italic'>Peasant Life in
Sweden</hi> (London, 1870), p. 251.</note> The Huzuls
of the Carpathians, a pastoral people, who dread the ravages
of wild beasts on their flocks and herds, are unwilling to
mention the bear by his proper name, so they call him
<pb n='398'/><anchor id='Pg398'/>
respectfully <q>the little uncle</q> or <q>the big one.</q> In like
manner and for similar reasons they name the wolf <q>the
little one</q> and the serpent <q>the long one.</q><note place='foot'>R. F. Kaindl, <hi rend='italic'>Die Huzulen</hi>
(Vienna, 1894), p. 103; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Viehzucht
und Viehzauber in den Ostkarpaten,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxix. (1896) p. 387.</note> They may not
say that wool is scalded, or in the heat of summer the sheep
would rub themselves till their sides were raw; so they
merely say that the wool is warmed.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi>, <q>Neue Beiträge zur Ethnologie
und Volkskunde der Huzulen,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxix. (1896) p. 73.</note> The Lapps fear to
call the bear by his true name, lest he should ravage their
herds; so they speak of him as <q>the old man with the coat
of skin,</q> and in cooking his flesh to furnish a meal they may
not refer to the work they are engaged in as <q>cooking,</q> but
must designate it by a special term.<note place='foot'>C. Leemius, <hi rend='italic'>De Lapponibus Finmarchiae
eorumque lingua, vita, et
religione pristina commentatio</hi> (Copenhagen,
1767), pp. 502 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Finns speak of
the bear as <q>the apple of the wood,</q> <q>beautiful honey-paw,</q>
<q>the pride of the thicket,</q> <q>the old man,</q> and so on.<note place='foot'>M. A. Castren, <hi rend='italic'>Vorlesungen über die
finnische Mythologie</hi> (St. Petersburg,
1853), p. 201.</note> And
in general a Finnish hunter thinks that he will have poor
sport if he calls animals by their real names; the beasts
resent it. The fox and the hare are only spoken of as
<q>game,</q> and the lynx is termed <q>the forest cat,</q> lest it
should devour the sheep.<note place='foot'>Varonen, reported by Hon. J.
Abercromby in <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, ii. (1891)
pp. 245 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Esthonian peasants are very loth
to mention wild beasts by their proper names, for they
believe that the creatures will not do so much harm if only
they are called by other names than their own. Hence they
speak of the bear as <q>broad foot</q> and the wolf as <q>grey
coat.</q><note place='foot'>Boecler-Kreutzwald, <hi rend='italic'>Der Ehsten
abergläubische Gebräuche, Weisen und
Gewohnheiten</hi>, p. 120.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The names
of various
animals
tabooed in
Siberia,
Kamtchatka,
and
America.</note>
The natives of Siberia are unwilling to call a bear a
bear; they speak of him as <q>the little old man,</q> <q>the master
of the forest,</q> <q>the sage,</q> <q>the respected one.</q> Some who
are more familiar style him <q>my cousin.</q><note place='foot'>P. Labbé, <hi rend='italic'>Un Bagne russe, l'île de
Sakhaline</hi> (Paris, 1903), p. 231.</note> The Kamtchatkans
reverence the whale, the bear, and the wolf from fear,
and never mention their names when they meet them, believing
that they understand human speech.<note place='foot'>G. W. Steller, <hi rend='italic'>Beschreibung von
dem Lande Kamtschatka</hi> (Frankfort and
Leipsic, 1774), p. 276.</note> Further, they
<pb n='399'/><anchor id='Pg399'/>
think that mice also understand the Kamtchatkan language;
so in autumn, when they rob the field-mice of the bulbs which
these little creatures have laid up in their burrows as a store
against winter, they call everything by names different from
the ordinary ones, lest the mice should know what they were
saying. Moreover, they leave odds and ends, such as old
rags, broken needles, cedar-nuts, and so forth, in the burrows,
to make the mice think that the transaction has been not a
robbery but a fair exchange. If they did not do that, they
fancy that the mice would go and drown or hang themselves
out of pure vexation; and then what would the Kamtchatkans
do without the mice to gather the bulbs for them?
They also speak kindly to the animals, and beg them not to
take it ill, explaining that what they do is done out of pure
friendship.<note place='foot'>G. W. Steller, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 91;
compare <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> pp. 129, 130.</note> The Cherokee Indians regard the rattlesnake
as a superior being and take great pains not to offend him.
They never say that a man has been bitten by a snake but
that he has been <q>scratched by a briar.</q> In like manner,
when an eagle has been shot for a ceremonial dance, it is
announced that <q>a snowbird has been killed.</q> The purpose
is to deceive the spirits of rattlesnakes or eagles which might
be listening.<note place='foot'>J. Mooney, <q>Sacred Formulas of
the Cherokees,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Seventh Annual Report
of the Bureau of Ethnology</hi> (Washington,
1892), p. 352. Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<q>Myths of the Cherokee,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Nineteenth
Annual Report of the Bureau of
American Ethnology</hi>, Part i. (Washington,
1900) p. 295.</note> The Esquimaux of Bering Strait think that
some animals can hear and understand what is said of them
at a distance. Hence, when a hunter is going out to kill
bears he will speak of them with the greatest respect and
give out that he is going to hunt some other beast. Thus
the bears will be deceived and taken unawares.<note place='foot'>E. W. Nelson, <q>The Eskimo
about Bering Strait,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Eighteenth
Annual Report of the Bureau of
American Ethnology</hi>, Part i. (Washington,
1899) p. 438.</note> Among
the Esquimaux of Baffin Land, women in mourning may
not mention the names of any animals.<note place='foot'>F. Boas, <q>The Eskimo of Baffin
Land and Hudson Bay,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin of
the American Museum of Natural
History</hi>, xv. (1901) p. 148.</note> Among the
Thompson Indians of British Columbia, children may not
name the coyote or prairie wolf in winter, lest he should
turn on his back and so bring cold weather.<note place='foot'>J. Teit, <q>The Thompson Indians
of British Columbia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Memoir of the
American Museum of Natural History,
The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</hi>,
vol. i. part iv. (April 1900) p.
374.</note>
</p>

<pb n='400'/><anchor id='Pg400'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Names of
animals
and things
tabooed by
the Arabs,
Africans,
and
Malagasy.</note>
The Arabs call a man who has been bitten by a snake
<q>the sound one</q>; leprosy or the scab they designate <q>the
blessed disease</q>; the left side they name <q>the lucky side</q>;
they will not speak of a lion by his right name, but refer to
him as for example <q>the fox.</q><note place='foot'>J. Wellhausen, <hi rend='italic'>Reste arabischen
Heidentums</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Berlin, 1897), p. 199.</note> In Africa the lion is
alluded to with the same ceremonious respect as the wolf
and the bear in northern Europe and Asia. The Arabs of
Algeria, who hunt the lion, speak of him as Mr. John Johnson
(Johan-ben-el-Johan), because he has the noblest qualities of
man and understands all languages. Hence, too, the first
huntsman to catch sight of the beast points at him with his
finger and says, <q>He is not there</q>; for if he were to say
<q>He is there,</q> the lion would eat him up.<note place='foot'>A. Certeux et E. H. Carnoy,
<hi rend='italic'>L'Algérie traditionnelle</hi> (Paris and
Algiers, 1884), pp. 172, 175.</note> Except under
dire necessity the Waziguas of eastern Africa never mention
the name of the lion from fear of attracting him. They call
him <q>the owner of the land</q> or <q>the great beast.</q><note place='foot'>Father Picarda, <q>Autour de Mandéra,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Missions Catholiques</hi>, xviii.
(1886) p. 227.</note> The
negroes of Angola always use the word <foreign rend='italic'>ngana</foreign> (<q>sir</q>) in
speaking of the same noble animal, because they think that
he is <q>fetish</q> and would not fail to punish them for disrespect
if they omitted to do so.<note place='foot'>J. J. Monteiro, <hi rend='italic'>Angola and the
River Congo</hi> (London, 1875), ii. 116.</note> Bushmen and Bechuanas
both deem it unlucky to speak of the lion by his proper
name; the Bechuanas call him <q>the boy with the beard.</q><note place='foot'>J. Mackenzie, <hi rend='italic'>Ten Years north of
the Orange River</hi> (Edinburgh, 1871),
p. 151; C. R. Conder, in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xvi.
(1887) p. 84.</note>
During an epidemic of smallpox in Mombasa, British East
Africa, it was noticed that the people were unwilling to
mention the native name (<foreign rend='italic'>ndui</foreign>) of the disease. They
referred to it either as <q>grains of corn</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>tete</foreign>) or simply as
<q>the bad disease.</q><note place='foot'>H. B. Johnstone, <q>Notes on the
Customs of the Tribes occupying Mombasa
Sub-district, British East Africa,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxii. (1902) p. 268.</note> So the Chinese of Amoy are averse to
speak of fever by its proper name; they prefer to call it
<q>beggar's disease,</q> hoping thereby to make the demons of
fever imagine that they despise it and that therefore it would
be useless to attack them.<note place='foot'>J. J. M. de Groot, <hi rend='italic'>The Religious
System of China</hi>, v. (Leyden, 1907)
p. 691.</note> Some of the natives of Nigeria
<pb n='401'/><anchor id='Pg401'/>
dread the owl as a bird of ill omen and are loth to mention
its name, preferring to speak of it by means of a circumlocution
such as <q>the bird that makes one afraid.</q><note place='foot'>A. F. Mockler-Ferryman, <hi rend='italic'>British
Nigeria</hi> (London, 1902), p. 285.</note>
The Herero think that if they see a snake and call it by
its name, the reptile will sting them, but that if they call it a
strap (<foreign rend='italic'>omuvia</foreign>) it will lie still.<note place='foot'>J. Irle, <hi rend='italic'>Die Herero</hi> (Gütersloh,
1906), p. 133.</note> When Nandi warriors are
out on an expedition, they may not call a knife a knife
(<foreign rend='italic'>chepkeswet</foreign>); they must call it <q>an arrow for bleeding cattle</q>
(<foreign rend='italic'>loñget</foreign>); and none of the party may utter the usual word
employed in greeting males.<note place='foot'>A. C. Hollis, <hi rend='italic'>The Nandi</hi> (Oxford,
1909), p. 43.</note> In Madagascar there seems
to be an aversion to pronouncing the word for lightning
(<foreign rend='italic'>vàratra</foreign>); the word for mud (<foreign rend='italic'>fòtaka</foreign>) is sometimes substituted
for it.<note place='foot'>H. F. Standing, <q>Malagasy <foreign rend='italic'>fady</foreign>,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar
Magazine</hi>, vol. ii., <hi rend='italic'>Reprint of the
Second Four Numbers</hi> (Antananarivo,
1896), p. 258.</note> Again, it is strictly forbidden to mention the
word for crocodile (<foreign rend='italic'>màmba</foreign>) near some rivers of Madagascar;
and if clothes should be wetted in certain other rivers of
the island, you may not say that they are wet (<foreign rend='italic'>lèna</foreign>);
you must say that they are on fire (<foreign rend='italic'>may</foreign>) or that
they are drinking water (<foreign rend='italic'>misòtro ràno</foreign>).<note place='foot'>H. F. Standing, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 263.</note> A certain spirit,
who used to inhabit a lake in Madagascar, entertained a
rooted aversion to salt, so that whenever the thing was
carried past the lake in which he resided it had to be called
by another name, or it would all have been dissolved and
lost. The persons whom he inspired had to veil their
references to the obnoxious article under the disguise of
<q>sweet peppers.</q><note place='foot'>J. Sibree, <hi rend='italic'>The Great African
Island</hi>, pp. 307 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In a West African story we read of a
man who was told that he would die if ever the word for
salt was pronounced in his hearing. The fatal word was
pronounced, and die he did sure enough, but he soon came
to life again with the help of a magical wooden pestle of
which he was the lucky possessor.<note place='foot'>R. H. Nassau, <hi rend='italic'>Fetichism in West
Africa</hi> (London, 1904), pp. 381 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Names of
animals,
especially
the snake
and the
tiger,
tabooed
in India.</note>
In India the animals whose names are most commonly
tabooed are the snake and the tiger, but the same tribute of
respect is paid to other beasts also. Sayids and Mussulmans
<pb n='402'/><anchor id='Pg402'/>
of high rank in northern India say that you should
never call a snake by its proper name, but always describe
it either as a tiger (<foreign rend='italic'>sher</foreign>) or a string (<foreign rend='italic'>rassi</foreign>).<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, i. p. 15,
§ 122.</note> In Telingana
the euphemistic name for a snake, which should always be
employed, is worm or insect (<foreign rend='italic'>purugu</foreign>); if you call a cobra by
its proper name, the creature will haunt you for seven years
and bite you at the first opportunity.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>North Indian Notes and Queries</hi>,
i. p. 104, § 690.</note> Ignorant Bengalee
women will not mention a snake or a thief by their proper
names at night, for fear that one or other might appear.
When they have to allude to a serpent, they call it <q>the
creeping thing</q>; when they speak of a thief, they say <q>the
unwelcome visitor.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi> v. p. 133, § 372.</note> Other euphemisms for the snake in
northern India are <q>maternal uncle</q> and <q>rope.</q> They
say that if a snake bites you, you should not mention its
name, but merely observe <q>A rope has touched me.</q><note place='foot'>W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion
and Folk-lore of Northern India</hi>
(Westminster, 1896), ii. 142 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Natives of Travancore are careful not to speak disrespectfully
of serpents. A cobra is called <q>the good lord</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>nalla
tambiran</foreign>) or <q>the good snake</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>nalla pambu</foreign>). While the
Malayalies of the Shervaray Hills are hunting the tiger, they
speak of the beast only as <q>the dog.</q><note place='foot'>S. Mateer, <hi rend='italic'>Native Life in Travancore</hi>,
pp. 320 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Canarese of
southern India call the tiger either <q>the dog</q> or <q>the
jackal</q>; they think that if they called him by his proper
name, he would be sure to carry off one of them.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>North Indian Notes and Queries</hi>,
v. p. 133, § 372.</note> The
jungle people of northern India, who meet the tiger in his
native haunts, will not pronounce his name, but speak of him
as <q>the jackal</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>gídar</foreign>), or <q>the beast</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>janwar</foreign>), or use
some other euphemistic term. In some places they treat
the wolf and the bear in the same fashion.<note place='foot'>W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 212.</note> The Pankas of
South Mirzapur will not name the tiger, bear, camel, or
donkey by their proper names; the camel they call <q>long
neck.</q> Other tribes of the same district only scruple to
mention certain animals in the morning. Thus, the Kharwars,
a Dravidian tribe, will not name a pig, squirrel, hare,
jackal, bear, monkey, or donkey in the morning hours; if
<pb n='403'/><anchor id='Pg403'/>
they have to allude to these animals at that time, they call
them by special names. For instance, they call the hare
<q>the four-footed one</q> or <q>he that hides in the rocks</q>;
while they speak of the bear as <foreign rend='italic'>jigariya</foreign>, which being interpreted
means <q>he with the liver of compassion.</q> If the
Bhuiyars are absolutely obliged to refer to a monkey or a
bear in the morning, they speak of the monkey as <q>the tree-climber</q>
and the bear as <q>the eater of white ants.</q> They
would not mention a crocodile. Among the Pataris the
matutinal title of the bear is <q>the hairy creature.</q><note place='foot'>W. Crooke in <hi rend='italic'>North Indian Notes
and Queries</hi>, i. p. 70, § 579; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Tribes and Castes of the North-Western
Provinces and Oudh</hi>, iii. 249; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion and Folk-lore of
Northern India</hi> (Westminster, 1896),
ii. 54.</note> The
Kols, a Dravidian race of northern India, will not speak of
death or beasts of prey by their proper names in the morning.
Their name for the tiger at that time of day is <q>he
with the claws,</q> and for the elephant <q>he with the teeth.</q><note place='foot'>W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes and Castes of
the North-Western Provinces and
Oudh</hi>, iii. 314.</note>
The forests of the Sundarbans, the district at the mouth of
the Ganges, are full of man-eating tigers and the annual
loss of life among the woodcutters is heavy. Here accordingly
the ferocious animal is not called a tiger but a jackal
(<foreign rend='italic'>çial</foreign>).<note place='foot'>D. Sunder, <q>Exorcism of Wild
Animals in the Sundarbans,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</hi>, lxxii.
part iii. (Calcutta, 1904) pp. 45 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 51.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Names of
animals
and things
tabooed in
Indo-China.</note>
In Annam the fear inspired by tigers, elephants, and
other wild animals induces the people to address these
creatures with the greatest respect as <q>lord</q> or <q>grandfather,</q>
lest the beasts should take umbrage and attack them.<note place='foot'>H. Mouhot, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in the Central
Parts of Indo-China</hi> (London, 1864),
i. 263 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
The tiger reigns supreme in the forests of Tonquin and
Cochin-China, and the peasants honour him as a maleficent
deity. In talking of him they always call him <foreign rend='italic'>ong</foreign>, which
means monsieur or grandfather. They are convinced that
if they dared to speak of him disrespectfully, he would
avenge the insult.<note place='foot'>Mgr Masson, in <hi rend='italic'>Annales de la
Propagation de la Foi</hi>, xxiv. (1852) p.
323. Compare Le R. P. Cadière,
<q>Croyances et dictons populaires de
la vallée du Nguôn-son,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de
l'École Française d'Extrême-Orient</hi>, i.
(1901) p. 134.</note> In Siam there are many people who
would never venture to utter the words tiger or crocodile in
a spot where these terrible creatures might be in hiding, lest
<pb n='404'/><anchor id='Pg404'/>
the sound of their names should attract the attention of the
beasts towards the speakers.<note place='foot'>E. Young, <hi rend='italic'>The Kingdom of the
Yellow Robe</hi> (Westminster, 1898), p.
61.</note> When the Malays of Patani
Bay in Siam are in the jungle and think there is a tiger near,
they will either speak of him in complimentary terms as the
<q>grandfather of the woods</q> or only mention him in a
whisper.<note place='foot'>N. Annandale, <q>Primitive Beliefs
and Customs of the Patani Fishermen,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Fasciculi Malayenses, Anthropology</hi>,
part i. (April 1903) p. 104.</note> In Laos, while a man is out hunting elephants he
is obliged to give conventional names to all common objects,
which creates a sort of special language for elephant-hunters.<note place='foot'>E. Aymonier, <hi rend='italic'>Notes sur le Laos</hi>,
p. 113; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage dans le Laos</hi>, i.
(Paris, 1895) p. 311. In the latter
passage the writer observes that the
custom of giving conventional names
to common objects is very generally
observed in Indo-China during the
prosecution of long and perilous
journeys undertaken periodically.</note>
So when the Chams and Orang-Glaï of Indo-China are
searching for the precious eagle-wood in the forest, they
must employ an artificial jargon to designate most objects of
everyday life; thus, for example, fire is called <q>the red,</q> a
she-goat becomes <q>a spider,</q> and so on. Some of the terms
which compose the jargon are borrowed from the dialects of
neighbouring tribes.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi>, <q>Les Tchames et leurs
religions,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue de l'Histoire des
Religions</hi>, xxiv. (1891) p. 278. Compare
A. Cabaton, <hi rend='italic'>Nouvelles Recherches
sur les Chams</hi> (Paris, 1901), p. 53.</note> When the Mentras or aborigines of
Malacca are searching for what they call <foreign rend='italic'>gaharu</foreign> (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>lignum
aloes</foreign>) they are obliged to use a special language, avoiding
the words in ordinary use. At such times they call <foreign rend='italic'>gaharu</foreign>
by the name of <foreign rend='italic'>tabak</foreign>, and they speak of a snake as <q>the
long animal</q> and of the elephant as <q>the great animal.</q>
They have also to observe a number of other taboos, particularly
in the matter of diet. If a man has found a promising
<foreign rend='italic'>gaharu</foreign> tree, and on going home dreams that the guardian
spirit of the tree (<foreign rend='italic'>hantu gaharu</foreign>) demands a human victim as
the price of his property, the dreamer will try next day to
catch somebody asleep and to smear his forehead with lime.
This is a sign to the guardian spirit of the tree, who
accordingly carries away the soul of the sleeper to the
land of the dead by means of a fever or other ailment,
whereas the original dreamer gets a good supply of aloes
wood.<note place='foot'>D. F. A. Hervey, in <hi rend='italic'>Indian Notes
and Queries</hi> (December 1886), p. 45,
§ 154.</note>
</p>

<pb n='405'/><anchor id='Pg405'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Special
language
used by
East Indian
searchers
for
camphor.</note>
At certain seasons of the year parties of Jakuns and
Binuas go out to seek for camphor in the luxuriant forests
of their native country, which is the narrow southern
extremity of the Malay Peninsula, the Land's End of Asia.
They are absent for three or four months together, and
during the whole of this time the use of the ordinary Malay
language is forbidden to them, and they have to speak a
special language called by them the <foreign rend='italic'>bassa kapor</foreign> (camphor
language) or <foreign rend='italic'>pantang<note place='foot'><foreign rend='italic'>Pantang</foreign> is equivalent to taboo.
In this sense it is used also by the
Dyaks. See S. W. Tromp, <q>Een
Dajaksch Feest,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>,
xxxix. (1890) pp. 31 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> kapur</foreign>. Indeed not only have the
searchers to employ this peculiar language, but even the
men and women who stay at home in the villages are
obliged to speak it while the others are away looking for
the camphor. They believe that a spirit presides over the
camphor trees, and that without propitiating him they could
not obtain the precious gum; the shrill cry of a species of
cicada, heard at night, is supposed to be the voice of the
spirit. If they failed to employ the camphor language, they
think that they would have great difficulty in finding the
camphor trees, and that even when they did find them the
camphor would not yield itself up to the collector. The
camphor language consists in great part of words which are
either Malayan or of Malay origin; but it also contains
many words which are not Malayan but are presumed to be
remains of the original Jakun dialects now almost extinct in
these districts. The words derived from Malayan are formed
in many cases by merely substituting a descriptive phrase
for the common term. Thus instead of rice they say <q>grass
fruit</q>; instead of gun they say <q>far sounding</q>; the epithet
<q>short-legged</q> is substituted for hog; hair is referred to as
<q>leaves,</q> and so on.<note place='foot'>J. R. Logan, <q>The Orang Binua
of Johore,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Eastern
Archipelago and Eastern Asia</hi>, i.
(1847) pp. 249, 263-265; A. Bastian,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen Asien</hi>, v.
37; H. Lake and H. J. Kelsall, <q>The
Camphor Tree and Camphor Language
of Johore,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Straits Branch
of the Royal Asiatic Society</hi>, No. 26
(January 1894), pp. 39 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. W.
Skeat, <hi rend='italic'>Malay Magic</hi>, pp. 212-214;
W. W. Skeat and C. O. Blagden,
<hi rend='italic'>Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula</hi>
(London, 1906), ii. 414-431.</note> So when the Battas or Bataks of Sumatra
have gone out to search for camphor, they must abandon the
speech of daily life as soon as they reach the camphor
<pb n='406'/><anchor id='Pg406'/>
forest. For example, if they wish to speak of the forest they
may not use the ordinary word for it (<foreign rend='italic'>hoetan</foreign>), but must call
it <foreign rend='italic'>kerrengettetdoeng</foreign>. When they have fixed on a spot in
which to try their luck, they set up a booth and clear a
space in front of it to serve as a place of sacrifice. Here,
after summoning the camphor spirit (<foreign rend='italic'>berroe ni kapoer</foreign>) by
playing on a flute, they offer sacrifice to him repeatedly.
Then they lie down to dream of the place where camphor is
to be found. If this succeeds, the leader goes and chooses
the tree. When it has been cut down to the accompaniment
of certain spells or incantations, one of the men runs and
wraps the top of the fallen tree in a garment to prevent the
camphor from escaping from the trunk before they have
secured it. Then the tree is cleft and split up in the search
for the camphor crystals, which are to be found in the fibres
of the wood.<note place='foot'>C. M. Pleyte, <q>Herinneringen uit
Oost-Indië,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift van het koninklijk
Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig
Genootschap</hi>, II Serie, xvii. (1900) pp.
27 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Similarly, when the Kayans of Borneo are
searching for camphor, they talk a language invented solely
for their use at this time. The camphor itself is never mentioned
by its proper name, but is always referred to as <q>the
thing that smells</q>; and all the tools employed in collecting
the drug receive fanciful names. Unless they conform to
this rule they suppose that the camphor crystals, which are
found only in the crevices of the wood, will elude them.<note place='foot'>W. H. Furness, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore in Borneo</hi>
(Wallingford, Pennsylvania, 1899;
privately printed), p. 27; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Home-life
of Borneo Head-hunters</hi> (Philadelphia,
1902), p. 17. A special
language is also used in the search for
camphor by some of the natives of
Sumatra. See Th. A. L. Heyting,
<q>Beschrijving der onder-afdeeling
Groot-Mandeling en Batang-Natal,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch
Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</hi>, Tweede
Serie, xiv. (1897) p. 276.</note>
The Malanau tribes of Borneo observe the same custom very
strictly, believing that the crystals would immediately dissolve
if they spoke anything but the camphor language. For
example, the common Malanau word for <q>return</q> is <foreign rend='italic'>muli</foreign>,
but in presence of a camphor tree they say <foreign rend='italic'>beteku</foreign>. Again,
<q>to hide</q> is <foreign rend='italic'>palim</foreign> in the Malanau language, but when they
are looking for camphor they say <foreign rend='italic'>krian</foreign>. In like manner,
all common names for implements and food are exchanged
for others. In some tribes the camphor-seekers may
never mention the names of chiefs and influential men;
<pb n='407'/><anchor id='Pg407'/>
if they broke this rule, they would find no camphor in
the trees.<note place='foot'>W. H. Furness, <hi rend='italic'>Home-life of
Borneo Head-hunters</hi>, pp. 168 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Special
languages
used by
Malay
miners, fowlers, and fishermen.</note>
In the western states of the Malay Peninsula the chief
industry is tin-mining, and odd ideas prevail among the
natives as to the nature and properties of the ore. They
regard it as alive and growing, sometimes in the shape of a
buffalo, which makes its way from place to place underground.
Ore of inferior quality is excused on the score of
its tender years; it will no doubt improve as it grows older.
Not only is the tin believed to be under the protection and
command of certain spirits who must be propitiated, but it
is even supposed to have its own special likes and dislikes
for certain persons and things. Hence the Malays deem it
advisable to treat tin ore with respect, to consult its convenience,
nay, to conduct the business of mining in such a
way that the ore may, as it were, be extracted without its
own knowledge. When such are their ideas about the
mineral it is no wonder that the miners scruple to employ
certain words in the mines, and replace them by others
which are less likely to give offence to the ore or its guardian
spirits. Thus, for example, the elephant must not be called
an elephant but <q>the tall one who turns himself about</q>;
and in like manner special words, different from those in
common use, are employed by the miners to designate the
cat, the buffalo, the snake, the centipede, tin sand, metallic
tin, and lemons. Lemons are particularly distasteful to the
spirits; they may not be brought into the mines.<note place='foot'>W. W. Skeat, <hi rend='italic'>Malay Magic</hi>, pp.
250, 253-260. In like manner the
people of Sikhim intensely dread all
mining operations, believing that the
ores and veins of metals are the stored
treasures of the earth-spirits, who are
enraged by the removal of these
treasures and visit the robbers with
sickness, failure of crops, and other
calamities. Hence the Sikhimese leave
the copper mines to be worked by
Nepaulese. See L. A. Waddell,
<hi rend='italic'>Among the Himalayas</hi> (Westminster,
1899), p. 101.</note> Again,
the Malay wizard, who is engaged in snaring pigeons with
the help of a decoy-bird and a calling-tube, must on no
account call things by their common names. The tiny
conical hut, in which he sits waiting for the wild pigeons to
come fluttering about him, goes by the high-sounding name
of the Magic Prince, perhaps with a delicate allusion to
its noble inmate. The calling-tube is known as Prince
<pb n='408'/><anchor id='Pg408'/>
Distraction, doubtless on account of the extraordinary
fascination it exercises on the birds. The decoy-pigeon
receives the name of the Squatting Princess, and the rod with
a noose at the end of it, which serves to catch the unwary
birds, is disguised under the title of Prince Invitation.
Everything, in fact, is on a princely scale, so far at least as
words can make it so. The very nooses destined to be
slipped over the necks or legs of the little struggling prisoners
are dignified by the title of King Solomon's necklaces and
armlets; and the trap into which the birds are invited to
walk is variously described as King Solomon's Audience
Chamber, or a Palace Tower, or an Ivory Hall carpeted
with silver and railed with amalgam. What pigeon could
resist these manifold attractions, especially when it is
addressed by the respectful title of Princess Kapor or
Princess Sarap or Princess Puding?<note place='foot'>W. W. Skeat, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 139 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Again, the fisher-folk
on the east coast of the Malay Peninsula, like their
brethren in Scotland, are reluctant to mention the names of
birds or beasts while they are at sea. All animals then go
by the name of <foreign rend='italic'>cheweh</foreign>, a meaningless word which is believed
not to be understood by the creatures to whom it refers.
Particular kinds of animals are distinguished by appropriate
epithets; the pig is <q>the grunting <foreign rend='italic'>cheweh</foreign>,</q> the buffalo is <q>the
<foreign rend='italic'>cheweh</foreign> that says <foreign rend='italic'>uak</foreign>,</q> the snipe is <q>the <foreign rend='italic'>cheweh</foreign> that cries <foreign rend='italic'>kek-kek</foreign>,</q>
and so on.<note place='foot'>W. W. Skeat, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 192 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In this respect the fishermen of Patani Bay
class together sea spirits, Buddhist monks, beasts, and
reptiles; these are all <foreign rend='italic'>cheweh</foreign> and their common names may
not be mentioned at sea. But, curiously enough, they lay no
such embargo on the names of fish and birds, except the
vulture and domestic fowls and ducks. At sea the vulture
is named <q>bald head,</q> the tiger <q>striped,</q> the snake
<q>weaver's sword,</q> the horse <q>fast,</q> and a species of monkey
<q>long tail.</q> The human foot is called <q>tortoise,</q> and
a Buddhist monk <q>yellow</q> on account of the colour of
his robe. These Malay fishermen are at least as unwilling
to speak of a Buddhist monk at sea as Scotch fishermen
are to mention a minister in similar circumstances. If
one of them mentions a monk, his mates will fall on him
and beat him; whereas for other slips of the tongue they
<pb n='409'/><anchor id='Pg409'/>
think it enough to throw a little bilge-water over the back of
the transgressor and to say, <q>May the ill-luck be dismissed!</q>
The use of this special language is even more obligatory by
night than by day. On shore the fishermen make very
merry over those lubberly landsmen who cannot talk correctly
at sea.<note place='foot'>N. Annandale, <q>Primitive Beliefs
and Customs of the Patani Fishermen,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Fasciculi Malayenses, Anthropology</hi>,
part i. (April 1903) pp. 84-86.</note> In like manner Achinese fishermen, in northern
Sumatra, employ a special vocabulary when they are at sea.
Thus they may not call a mountain a mountain, or mountain-high
billows would swamp the boat; they refer to it as <q>high
ground.</q> They may not speak of an elephant by its proper
name of <foreign rend='italic'>gadjah</foreign>, but must call it <foreign rend='italic'>pò meurah</foreign>. If a man wishes
to say that something is clear, he must not use the ordinary
word for clear (<foreign rend='italic'>lheuëh</foreign>) because it bears the meaning also of
<q>free,</q> <q>loose</q>; and the utterance of such a word might
enable the fish to get free from the net and escape. Instead
of <foreign rend='italic'>lheuëh</foreign> he must therefore employ the less dangerous
synonym <foreign rend='italic'>leungka</foreign>. In like manner, we are told, among the
fishermen of the north coast of Java whole lists of words
might be compiled which are tabooed at sea and must be
replaced by others.<note place='foot'>C. Snouck Hurgronje, <hi rend='italic'>De Atjèhers</hi>
(Batavia and Leyden, 1893-1894), i.
303.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Names of
things and
animals
tabooed in
Sumatra,
Nias, and
Java.</note>
In Sumatra the spirits of the gold mines are treated with
as much deference as the spirits of the tin-mines in the
Malay Peninsula. Tin, ivory, and the like may not be
brought by the miners to the scene of their operations, for at
the scent of such things the spirits of the mine would cause
the gold to vanish. For the same reason it is forbidden to
refer to certain things by their proper names, and in speaking
of them the miners must use other words. In some
cases, for example in removing the grains of the gold, a deep
silence must be observed; no commands may be given or
questions asked,<note place='foot'>J. L. van der Toorn, <q>Het animisme
bij den Minangkabauer der
Padangsche Bovenlanden,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van
Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>, xxxix. (1890) p.
100. As to the superstitions of gold-washers
among the Gayos of Sumatra,
see C. Snouck Hurgronje, <hi rend='italic'>Het Gajoland
en zijne Bewoners</hi> (Batavia, 1903), pp.
361 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> probably because the removal of the
precious metal is regarded as a theft which the spirits would
punish if they caught the thieves in the act. Certainly the
<pb n='410'/><anchor id='Pg410'/>
Dyaks believe that gold has a soul which seeks to avenge
itself on men who dig the precious metal. But the angry
spirit is powerless to harm miners who observe certain
precautions, such as never to bathe in a river with their faces
turned up stream, never to sit with their legs dangling, and
never to tie up their hair.<note place='foot'>M. T. H. Perelaer, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographische
Beschrijving der Dajaks</hi> (Zalt-Bommel,
1870), p. 215.</note> Again, a Sumatran who fancies
that there is a tiger or a crocodile in his neighbourhood, will
speak of the animal by the honourable title of <q>grandfather</q>
for the purpose of propitiating the creature.<note place='foot'>J. T. Nieuwenhuisen en H. C. B.
von Rosenberg, <q>Verslag omtrent het
eiland Nias,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verhandelingen van het
Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten
en Wetenschappen</hi>, xxx. (1863) p. 115.
Compare W. Marsden, <hi rend='italic'>History of
Sumatra</hi>, p. 292; T. J. Newbold,
<hi rend='italic'>Account of the British Settlements in
the Straits of Malacca</hi>, ii. 192 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the
forest a Karo-Batak refers to a tiger as <q>Grandfather
to whom the wood belongs,</q> <q>he with the striped coat,</q>
or <q>the roving trap.</q><note place='foot'>J. E. Neumann, <q><foreign rend='italic'>Kemali</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Pantang</foreign>
en <foreign rend='italic'>Rèboe</foreign> bij de Karo-Bataks,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift
voor Indische Taal- Land- en
Volkenkunde</hi>, xlviii. (1906) pp. 511
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among the Gayos of Sumatra
it is forbidden to mention the name of small-pox in the
house of a man who is suffering from the disease; and
the words for ugly, red, stinking, unlucky, and so forth
are forbidden under the same circumstances. The disease
is referred to under the title of <q>prince of the averters of
misfortune.</q><note place='foot'>C. Snouck Hurgronje, <hi rend='italic'>Het Gajoland
en zijne Bewoners</hi> (Batavia, 1903),
pp. 311 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> So long as the hunting season lasts, the
natives of Nias may not name the eye, the hammer, stones,
and in some places the sun by their true names; no smith
may ply his trade in the village, and no person may go from
one village to another to have smith's work done for him.
All this, with the exception of the rule about not naming
the eye and the sun, is done to prevent the dogs from growing
stiff, and so losing the power of running down the game.<note place='foot'>J. W. Thomas, <q>De jacht op het
eiland Nias,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>, xxvi.
(1880) p. 275.</note>
During the rice-harvest in Nias the reapers seldom speak to
each other, and when they do so, it is only in whispers.
Outside the field they must speak of everything by names
different from those in common use, which gives rise to a
special dialect or jargon known as <q>field speech.</q> It
has been observed that some of the words in this jargon
<pb n='411'/><anchor id='Pg411'/>
resemble words in the language of the Battas of Sumatra.<note place='foot'>L. N. H. A. Chatelin, <q>Godsdienst
en bijgeloof der Niassers,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift
voor Indische Taal- Land- en
Volkenkunde</hi>, xxvi. (1880) p. 165; H.
Sundermann, <q>Die Insel Nias und
die Mission daselbst,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Allgemeine Missions-Zeitschrift</hi>,
xi. (1884) p. 349; E.
Modigliani, <hi rend='italic'>Un Viaggio a Nias</hi> (Milan,
1890), p. 593.</note>
While these rice-reapers of Nias are at work they may not
address each other by their names; they must use only such
general terms as <q>man,</q> <q>woman,</q> <q>girl,</q> <q>old man,</q> and
<q>old woman.</q> The word for <q>fire</q> may not pass their lips;
instead of it they must use the word for <q>cold.</q> Other
words tabooed to them during the harvest are the words for
<q>smoke</q> and <q>stone.</q> If a reaper wishes to ask another
for his whetstone to sharpen his knife, he must speak of it
as a <q>fowl's egg.</q><note place='foot'>A. L. van Hasselt, <q>Nota, betreffende
de rijstcultuur in de Residentie
Tapanoeli,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>, xxxvi.
(1893) pp. 525 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The Singhalese
also call things by strange names when
they are in the rice-fields. See A. A.
Perera, <q>Glimpses of Singhalese Social
Life,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>, xxxii. (1903)
p. 437.</note> In Java when people suspect that a
tiger or crocodile is near, they avoid the use of the proper
name of the beast and refer to him as <q>the old lord</q> or
<q>grandfather.</q> Similarly, men who are watching a plantation
to protect it from wild boars speak of these animals as
<q>handsome men</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>wong bagus</foreign>). When after harvest the
unhusked rice is to be brought into the barn, the barn is
not called a barn but <q>the dark store-house.</q> Serious
epidemics may not be mentioned by their true names; thus
smallpox is called the <q>pretty girl</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>lara bagus</foreign>). The
Javanese are particularly careful to eschew certain common
words at evening or night. Thus the snake is then called a
<q>tree-root</q>; the venomous centipede is referred to as the
<q>red ant</q>; oil is spoken of as <q>water</q>; and so forth. And
when leaves and herbs are being gathered for use in medicine
they are regularly designated by other than their ordinary
names.<note place='foot'>G. A. J. Hazeu, <q>Kleine Bijdragen
tot de Ethnografie en de Folk-lore
van Java,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>, xlvii.
(1903) pp. 291 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Names of
things and
animals
tabooed in
Celebes.</note>
The Alfoors or Toradjas of Poso, in Celebes, are forbidden
by custom to speak the ordinary language when they
are at work in the harvest-field. At such times they employ
a secret language which is said to agree with the ordinary
one only in this, that in it some things are designated by
<pb n='412'/><anchor id='Pg412'/>
words usually applied in a different sense, or by descriptive
phrases or circumlocutions. Thus instead of <q>run</q> they say
<q>limp</q>; instead of <q>hand</q> they say <q>that with which one
reaches</q>; instead of <q>foot</q> they say <q>that with which one
limps</q>; and instead of <q>ear</q> they say <q>that with which
one hears.</q> Again, in the field-speech <q>to drink</q> becomes
<q>to thrust forward the mouth</q>; <q>to pass by</q> is expressed
by <q>to nod with the head</q>; a gun is <q>a fire-producer</q>;
and wood is <q>that which is carried on the shoulder.</q> The
writer who reports the custom was formerly of opinion that
this secret language was designed to avoid attracting the
attention of evil spirits to the ripe rice; but further enquiry
has satisfied him that the real reason for adopting it is a
wish not to frighten the soul of the rice by revealing to it
the alarming truth that it is about to be cut, carried home,
boiled, and eaten. It is just the words referring to these
actions, he tells us, which are especially tabooed and replaced
by others. Beginning with a rule of avoiding a certain
number of common words, the custom has grown among
people of the Malay stock till it has produced a complete
language for use in the fields. In Minahassa also this secret
field-speech consists in part of phrases or circumlocutions, of
which many are said to be very poetical.<note place='foot'>A. C. Kruijt, <q>Een en ander
aangaande het geestelijk en maatschappelijk
leven van den Poso-Alfoer,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap</hi>, xxxix.
(1895) pp. 146-148; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Eenige
ethnografische aanteekeningen omtrent
de Toboengkoe en de Tomori,</q> <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>
xliv. (1900) pp. 228 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> But it is not only
on the harvest field that the Toradja resorts to the use of a
secret language from superstitious motives. In the great
primaeval forest he feels ill at ease, for well he knows the
choleric temper of the spirits who inhabit the giant trees of
the wood, and that were he to excite their wrath they would
assuredly pay him out in one way or other, it might be by
carrying off his soul and so making him ill, it might be by
crushing him flat under a falling tree. These touchy beings
particularly dislike to hear certain words pronounced, and
accordingly on his way through the forest the Toradja takes
care to avoid the offensive terms and to substitute others for
them. Thus he will not call a dog a dog, but refers to it as
<q>the hairy one</q>; a buffalo is spoken of as <q>thick hide</q>; a
<pb n='413'/><anchor id='Pg413'/>
cooking pot becomes <q>that which is set down</q>; the hair of
the head is alluded to as <q>betel</q>; goats and pigs are <q>the
folk under the house</q>; a horse is <q>long nose</q>; and deer
are <q>denizens of the fell.</q> If he is rash or careless enough
to utter a forbidden word in the forest, a short-tempered
tree-spirit will fetch him such a bang on the head that the
blood will spout from his nose and mouth.<note place='foot'>N. Adriani und A. C. Kruijt, <q>Van
Posso naar Mori,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van
wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xliv. (1900) pp. 145 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Again, when
the weather is fine and the Toradja wishes it to continue so,
he is careful not to utter the word <q>rain,</q> for if he did so
the rain would fancy he was called for and would obligingly
present himself. Indeed, in the district of Pakambia,
which is frequently visited by heavy storms, the word <q>rain</q>
may not be mentioned throughout the year lest it should
provoke a tempest; the unmentionable thing is there
delicately alluded to as <q>tree-blossoms.</q><note place='foot'>A. C. Kruijt, <q>Regen lokken en
regen verdrijven bij de Toradja's van
Midden Celebes,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor
Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>,
xliv. (1901) p. 8; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Het rijk
Mori,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift van het Koniklijk
Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</hi>,
II. Serie, xvii. (1900) p. 464,
note.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Common
words
tabooed
by East
Indian
mariners
at sea.</note>
When a Bugineese or Macassar man is at sea and sailing
past a place which he believes to be haunted by evil
spirits, he keeps as quiet as he can; but if he is obliged to
speak he designates common things and actions, such as
water, wind, fire, cooking, eating, the rice-pot, and so forth,
by peculiar terms which are neither Bugineese nor Macassar,
and therefore cannot be understood by the evil spirits, whose
knowledge of languages is limited to these two tongues.
However, according to another and later account given by
the same authority, it appears that many of the substituted
terms are merely figurative expressions or descriptive phrases
borrowed from the ordinary language. Thus the word for
water is replaced by a rare word meaning <q>rain</q>; a rice-pot
is called a <q>black man</q>; boiled rice is <q>one who is
eaten</q>; a fish is a <q>tree-leaf</q>; a fowl is <q>one who lives in
a poultry hatch</q>; and an ape is a <q>tree-dweller.</q><note place='foot'>B. F. Matthes, <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de
Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes</hi> (The
Hague, 1875), p. 107; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Over de
<hi rend='italic'>âdá's</hi> of gewoonten der Makassaren en
Boegineezen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verslagen en Mededeelingen
der Koninklijke Akademie van
Wetenschappen</hi>, Afdeeling Letterkunde,
III. Reeks, ii. (Amsterdam, 1885) pp.
164 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Natives
of the island of Saleyer, which lies off the south coast of
<pb n='414'/><anchor id='Pg414'/>
Celebes, will not mention the name of their island when they
are making a certain sea-passage; and in sailing they will
never speak of a fair wind by its proper name. The reason
in both cases is a fear of disturbing the evil spirits.<note place='foot'>H. E. D. Engelhard, <q>Mededeelingen
over het eiland Saleijer,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde
van Neêrlandsch-Indië</hi>, Vierde
Volgreeks, viii. (1884) p. 369.</note> When
natives of the Sapoodi Archipelago, to the north-east of
Java, are at sea they will never say that they are near the
island of Sapoodi, for if they did so they would be carried
away from it by a head wind or by some other mishap.<note place='foot'>E. F. Jochim, <q>Beschrijving van
den Sapoedi Archipel,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift
voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>,
xxxvi. (1893) p. 361.</note>
When Galelareese sailors are crossing over to a land that is
some way off, say one or two days' sail, they do not remark
on any vessels that may heave in sight or any birds that
may fly past; for they believe that were they to do so they
would be driven out of their course and not reach the land
they are making for. Moreover, they may not mention their
own ship, or any part of it. If they have to speak of
the bow, for example, they say <q>the beak of the bird</q>;
starboard is named <q>sword,</q> and larboard <q>shield.</q><note place='foot'>M. J. van Baarda, <q>Fabelen, Verhalen
en Overleveringen der Galelareezen,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en
Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>,
xlv. (1895) p. 508.</note> The
inhabitants of Ternate and of the Sangi Islands deem it very
dangerous to point at distant objects or to name them while
they are at sea. Once while sailing with a crew of Ternate
men a European asked one of them the name of certain
small islands which they had passed. The man had been
talkative before, but the question reduced him to silence.
<q>Sir,</q> he said, <q>that is a great taboo; if I told you we
should at once have wind and tide against us, and perhaps
suffer a great calamity. As soon as we come to anchor I
will tell you the name of the islands.</q> The Sangi Islanders
have, besides the ordinary language, an ancient one which is
only partly understood by some of the people. This old
language is often used by them at sea, as well as in popular
songs and certain heathen rites.<note place='foot'>S. D. van de Velde van Cappellan,
<q>Verslag eener Bezoekreis naar de
Sangi-eilanden,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van
wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
i. (1857) pp. 33, 35.</note> The reason for resorting to
it on shipboard is to hinder the evil spirits from overhearing
<pb n='415'/><anchor id='Pg415'/>
and so frustrating the plans of the voyagers.<note place='foot'>A. C. Kruijt, <q>Een en ander
aangaande het geestelijk en maatschappelijk
leven van den Poso-Alfoer,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap</hi>, xxxix.
(1895) p. 148.</note> The Nufoors
of Dutch New Guinea believe that if they were to mention
the name of an island to which the bow of their vessel was
pointing, they would be met by storm, rain, or mist which
would drive them from their course.<note place='foot'>Th. J. F. van Hasselt, <q>Gebruik
van vermomde Taal door de Nufooren,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land-
en Volkenkunde</hi>, xlv. (1902) pp. 279 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Common
words
tabooed
in Sunda,
Borneo,
and the
Philippines.</note>
In some parts of Sunda it is taboo or forbidden to call
a goat a goat; it must be called a <q>deer under the house.</q>
A tiger may not be spoken of as a tiger; he must be referred
to as <q>the supple one,</q> <q>the one there,</q> <q>the honourable,</q>
<q>the whiskered one,</q> and so on. Neither a wild boar nor a
mouse may be mentioned by its proper name; a boar must
be called <q>the beautiful one</q> (masculine) and the mouse
<q>the beautiful one</q> (feminine). When the people are asked
what would be the consequence of breaking a taboo, they
generally say that the person or thing would suffer for it,
either by meeting with a mishap or by falling ill. But some
say they do not so much fear a misfortune as experience
an indefinite feeling, half fear, half reverence, towards an
institution of their forefathers. Others can assign no reason
for observing the taboos, and cut enquiry short by saying
that <q>It is so because it is so.</q><note place='foot'>K. F. Holle, <q>Snippers van den
Regent van Galoeh,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor
Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>,
xxvii. (1882) pp. 101 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When the Kenyahs of
Borneo are about to poison the fish of a section of the river
with the <foreign rend='italic'>tuba</foreign> root, they always speak of the matter as little
as possible and use the most indirect and fanciful modes of
expression. Thus they will say, <q>There are many leaves
fallen here,</q> meaning that there are many fish in the river.
And they will not breathe the name of the <foreign rend='italic'>tuba</foreign> root; if they
must refer to it, they call it <foreign rend='italic'>pakat abong</foreign>, where <foreign rend='italic'>abong</foreign> is the
name of a strong-smelling root something like <foreign rend='italic'>tuba</foreign>, and
<foreign rend='italic'>pakat</foreign> means <q>to agree upon</q>; so that <foreign rend='italic'>pakat abong</foreign> signifies
<q>what we have agreed to call <foreign rend='italic'>abong</foreign>.</q> This concealment of
the truth deceives all the bats, birds, and insects, which might
otherwise overhear the talk of the men and inform the fish of
the deep-laid plot against them.<note place='foot'>Ch. Hose and W. McDougall,
<q>The Relations between Men and
Animals in Sarawak,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxi. (1902)
p. 205; W. H. Furness, <hi rend='italic'>Home-life of
Borneo Head-hunters</hi> (Philadelphia,
1902), pp. 17, 186 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> These Kenyahs also fear
<pb n='416'/><anchor id='Pg416'/>
the crocodile and do not like to mention it by name, especially
if one be in sight; they refer to the beast as <q>the old
grandfather.</q><note place='foot'>Ch. Hose and W. McDougall, <hi rend='italic'>op.
cit.</hi> p. 186.</note> When small-pox invades a village of the
Sakarang Dyaks in Borneo, the people desert the place and
take refuge in the jungle. In the daytime they do not dare
to stir or to speak above a whisper, lest the spirits should see
or hear them. They do not call the small-pox by its proper
name, but speak of it as <q>jungle leaves</q> or <q>fruit</q> or <q>the
chief,</q> and ask the sufferer, <q>Has he left you?</q> and the
question is put in a whisper lest the spirit should hear.<note place='foot'>Ch. Brooke, <hi rend='italic'>Ten Years in Sarawak</hi>
(London, 1866), i. 208; Spenser St.
John, <hi rend='italic'>Life in the Forests of the Far
East</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. 71 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Natives of the Philippines were formerly prohibited from
speaking of the chase in the house of a fisherman and from
speaking of fishing in the house of a hunter; journeying by
land they might not talk of marine matters, and sailing on
the sea they might not talk of terrestrial matters.<note place='foot'>Juan de la Concepcion, <hi rend='italic'>Historia
general de Philipinas</hi>, i. (Manilla,
1788), p. 20. Compare J. Mallat, <hi rend='italic'>Les
Philippines</hi> (Paris, 1846), i. 64.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The avoidance
of
common
words
seems to
be based
on a fear
of spirits
and a wish
to deceive
them or
elude their
notice. Common
words
avoided by
hunters
and fowlers
in order to
deceive the
beasts and
birds.</note>
When we survey the instances of this superstition which
have now been enumerated, we can hardly fail to be struck
by the number of cases in which a fear of spirits, or of other
beings regarded as spiritual and intelligent, is assigned as the
reason for abstaining in certain circumstances from the use
of certain words.<note place='foot'>On this subject Mr. R. J. Wilkinson's
account of the Malay's attitude to
nature (<hi rend='italic'>Malay Beliefs</hi>, London and
Leyden, 1906, pp. 67 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>) deserves to
be quoted: <q>The practice of magic
arts enters into every department of
Malay life. If (as the people of the
Peninsula believe) all nature is teeming
with spiritual life, some spiritual
weapon is necessary to protect man
against possible ghostly foes. Now the
chief and most characteristic weapon
of the Malay in his fight against the
invisible world is courtesy. The peasant
will speak no evil of a tiger in the
jungle or of an evil spirit within the
limits of that spirit's authority....
The tiger is the symbol of kingly oppression;
still, he is royal and must
not be insulted; he is the <q>shaggy-haired
father</q> or <q>grandfather</q> of the
traveller in the woods. Even the
birds, the fish and the fruits that serve
as human food are entitled to a certain
consideration: the deer is addressed as
a <q>prince,</q> the coco-nut tree as a
<q>princess,</q> the chevrotin as <q>emperor
of the jungle</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>shah alam di-rimba</foreign>).
In all this respect paid to unseen
powers&mdash;for it is the soul of the animal
or plant that is feared&mdash;there is no
contemptible adulation or cringeing;
the Malay believes that courtesy honours
the speaker more than the person
addressed.</q></note> The speaker imagines himself to be overheard
and understood by spirits, or animals, or other beings
<pb n='417'/><anchor id='Pg417'/>
whom his fancy endows with human intelligence; and hence
he avoids certain words and substitutes others in their stead,
either from a desire to soothe and propitiate these beings by
speaking well of them, or from a dread that they may understand
his speech and know what he is about, when he happens
to be engaged in that which, if they knew of it, would excite
their anger or their fear. Hence the substituted terms fall into
two classes according as they are complimentary or enigmatic;
and these expressions are employed, according to circumstances,
for different and even opposite reasons, the complimentary
because they will be understood and appreciated,
and the enigmatic because they will not. We can now see
why persons engaged in occupations like fishing, fowling,
hunting, mining, reaping, and sailing the sea, should abstain
from the use of the common language and veil their meaning
in strange words and dark phrases. For they have this
in common that all of them are encroaching on the domain
of the elemental beings, the creatures who, whether visible
or invisible, whether clothed in fur or scales or feathers,
whether manifesting themselves in tree or stone or running
stream or breaking wave, or hovering unseen in the air, may
be thought to have the first right to those regions of earth
and sea and sky into which man intrudes only to plunder
and destroy. Thus deeply imbued with a sense of the all-pervading
life and intelligence of nature, man at a certain
stage of his intellectual development cannot but be visited
with fear or compunction, whether he is killing wild fowl
among the stormy Hebrides, or snaring doves in the sultry
thickets of the Malay Peninsula; whether he is hunting the
bear in Lapland snows, or the tiger in Indian jungles, or
hauling in the dripping net, laden with silvery herring, on
the coast of Scotland; whether he is searching for the
camphor crystals in the shade of the tropical forest, or
extracting the red gold from the darksome mine, or laying
low with a sweep of his sickle the yellow ears on the harvest
field. In all these his depredations on nature, man's first
endeavour apparently is by quietness and silence to escape
the notice of the beings whom he dreads; but if that cannot
be, he puts the best face he can on the matter by dissembling
his foul designs under a fair exterior, by flattering the
<pb n='418'/><anchor id='Pg418'/>
creatures whom he proposes to betray, and by so guarding
his lips, that, though his dark ambiguous words are understood
well enough by his fellows, they are wholly unintelligible
to his victims. He pretends to be what he is not, and to be
doing something quite different from the real business in
hand. He is not, for example, a fowler catching pigeons in
the forest; he is a Magic Prince or King Solomon himself<note place='foot'><p>The character of King Solomon
appears to be a favourite one with the
Malay sorcerer when he desires to ingratiate
himself with or lord it over the
powers of nature. Thus, for example,
in addressing silver ore the sage observes:&mdash;
</p>
<p>
<q><hi rend='italic'>If you do not come hither at this very moment<lb/>
You shall be a rebel unto God,<lb/>
And a rebel unto God's Prophet Solomon,<lb/>
For I am God's Prophet Solomon.</hi></q>&mdash;
</p>
<p>
See W. W. Skeat, <hi rend='italic'>Malay Magic</hi>, p. 273.
No doubt the fame of his wisdom has
earned for the Hebrew monarch this
distinction among the dusky wizards
of the East.</p></note>
inviting fair princesses into his palace tower or ivory hall.
Such childish pretences suffice to cheat the guileless creatures
whom the savage intends to rob or kill, perhaps they even
impose to some extent upon himself; for we can hardly dissever
them wholly from those forms of sympathetic magic in
which primitive man seeks to effect his purpose by imitating
the thing he desires to produce, or even by assimilating himself
to it. It is hard indeed for us to realise the mental
state of a Malay wizard masquerading before wild pigeons in
the character of King Solomon; yet perhaps the make-believe
of children and of the stage, where we see the players
daily forgetting their real selves in their passionate impersonation
of the shadowy realm of fancy, may afford us
some glimpse into the workings of that instinct of imitation
or mimicry which is deeply implanted in the constitution of
the human mind.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='419'/><anchor id='Pg419'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII. Our Debt To The Savage.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>General
conclusion.
Human
gods, on
whom the
welfare of
the community
is
believed to
depend,
are obliged
to observe
many rules
to ensure
their own
safety and
that of
their
people.</note>
It would be easy to extend the list of royal and priestly
taboos, but the instances collected in the preceding pages
may suffice as specimens. To conclude this part of our
subject it only remains to state summarily the general
conclusions to which our enquiries have thus far conducted
us. We have seen that in savage or barbarous
society there are often found men to whom the superstition
of their fellows ascribes a controlling influence over the
general course of nature. Such men are accordingly adored
and treated as gods. Whether these human divinities
also hold temporal sway over the lives and fortunes of
their adorers, or whether their functions are purely spiritual
and supernatural, in other words, whether they are kings as
well as gods or only the latter, is a distinction which hardly
concerns us here. Their supposed divinity is the essential
fact with which we have to deal. In virtue of it they are a
pledge and guarantee to their worshippers of the continuance
and orderly succession of those physical phenomena upon
which mankind depends for subsistence. Naturally, therefore,
the life and health of such a god-man are matters of
anxious concern to the people whose welfare and even
existence are bound up with his; naturally he is constrained
by them to conform to such rules as the wit of early man
has devised for averting the ills to which flesh is heir, including
the last ill, death. These rules, as an examination of
them has shewn, are nothing but the maxims with which, on
the primitive view, every man of common prudence must
comply if he would live long in the land. But while in the
<pb n='420'/><anchor id='Pg420'/>
case of ordinary men the observance of the rules is left to
the choice of the individual, in the case of the god-man it
is enforced under penalty of dismissal from his high station,
or even of death. For his worshippers have far too great
a stake in his life to allow him to play fast and loose with
it. Therefore all the quaint superstitions, the old-world
maxims, the venerable saws which the ingenuity of savage
philosophers elaborated long ago, and which old women at
chimney corners still impart as treasures of great price to
their descendants gathered round the cottage fire on winter
evenings&mdash;all these antique fancies clustered, all these cobwebs
of the brain were spun about the path of the old king,
the human god, who, immeshed in them like a fly in the
toils of a spider, could hardly stir a limb for the threads of
custom, <q>light as air but strong as links of iron,</q> that
crossing and recrossing each other in an endless maze bound
him fast within a network of observances from which death
or deposition alone could release him.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A study of
these rules
affords us
an insight
into the
philosophy
of the
savage. Our debt
to our
savage
forefathers.</note>
Thus to students of the past the life of the old kings
and priests teems with instruction. In it was summed up
all that passed for wisdom when the world was young. It
was the perfect pattern after which every man strove to
shape his life; a faultless model constructed with rigorous
accuracy upon the lines laid down by a barbarous philosophy.
Crude and false as that philosophy may seem to us, it would
be unjust to deny it the merit of logical consistency. Starting
from a conception of the vital principle as a tiny being
or soul existing in, but distinct and separable from, the
living being, it deduces for the practical guidance of life a
system of rules which in general hangs well together and
forms a fairly complete and harmonious whole.<note place='foot'><q>The mind of the savage is not a
blank; and when one becomes familiar
with his beliefs and superstitions, and
the complicated nature of his laws and
customs, preconceived notions of his
simplicity of thought go to the winds.
I have yet to find that most apocryphal
of beings described as the <q>unsophisticated
African.</q> We laugh at and
ridicule his fetishes and superstitions,
but we fail to follow the succession of
ideas and effort of mind which have
created these things. After most careful
observations extending over nineteen
years, I have come to the conclusion that
there is nothing in the customs and
fetishes of the African which does not
represent a definite course of reasoning</q>
(Rev. Thomas Lewis, <q>The Ancient
Kingdom of Kongo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Geographical
Journal</hi>, xix. (1902) p. 554). <q>The
study of primitive peoples is extremely
curious and full of surprises. It is
twenty years since I undertook it
among the Thonga and Pedi tribes of
South Africa, and the further I advance,
the more I am astonished at the great
number, the complexity, and the profundity
of the rites of these so-called
savages. Only a superficial observer
could accuse their individual or tribal
life of superficiality. If we take the
trouble to seek the reason of these
strange customs, we perceive that at
their base there are secret, obscure
reasons, principles hard to grasp, even
though the most fervent adepts of the
rite can give no account of it. To
discover these principles, and so to give
a true explanation of the rites, is the
supreme task of the ethnographer,&mdash;a
task in the highest degree delicate, for
it is impossible to perform it if we do
not lay aside our personal ideas to
saturate ourselves with those of primitive
peoples</q> (Rev. H. A. Junod,
<q>Les Conceptions physiologiques des
Bantou sud-africains et leurs tabous,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Revue d'Ethnographie et de Sociologie</hi>,
i. (1910) p. 126). These weighty
words, the fruit of ripe experience,
deserve to be pondered by those
who fancy that the elaborate system of
savage custom can have grown up
instinctively without a correspondingly
elaborate process of reasoning in the
minds of its founders. We may not,
indeed, always be able to discover the
reason for which a particular custom or
rite was instituted, for we are only
beginning to understand the mind of
uncivilised man; but all that we know
of him tends to shew that his practice,
however absurd it may seem to us,
originated in a definite train of thought
and for a definite and very practical
purpose.</note> The flaw&mdash;and
<pb n='421'/><anchor id='Pg421'/>
it is a fatal one&mdash;of the system lies not in its reasoning,
but in its premises; in its conception of the nature of life,
not in any irrelevancy of the conclusions which it draws
from that conception. But to stigmatise these premises as
ridiculous because we can easily detect their falseness, would
be ungrateful as well as unphilosophical. We stand upon
the foundation reared by the generations that have gone
before, and we can but dimly realise the painful and prolonged
efforts which it has cost humanity to struggle up to
the point, no very exalted one after all, which we have
reached. Our gratitude is due to the nameless and forgotten
toilers, whose patient thought and active exertions have
largely made us what we are. The amount of new knowledge
which one age, certainly which one man, can add to
the common store is small, and it argues stupidity or dishonesty,
besides ingratitude, to ignore the heap while vaunting
the few grains which it may have been our privilege to
add to it. There is indeed little danger at present of
undervaluing the contributions which modern times and
even classical antiquity have made to the general advancement
of our race. But when we pass these limits, the case
is different. Contempt and ridicule or abhorrence and
denunciation are too often the only recognition vouchsafed
to the savage and his ways. Yet of the benefactors whom
<pb n='422'/><anchor id='Pg422'/>
we are bound thankfully to commemorate, many, perhaps
most, were savages. For when all is said and done our
resemblances to the savage are still far more numerous than
our differences from him; and what we have in common
with him, and deliberately retain as true and useful, we owe
to our savage forefathers who slowly acquired by experience
and transmitted to us by inheritance those seemingly fundamental
ideas which we are apt to regard as original and
intuitive. We are like heirs to a fortune which has been
handed down for so many ages that the memory of those
who built it up is lost, and its possessors for the time being
regard it as having been an original and unalterable possession
of their race since the beginning of the world. But
reflection and enquiry should satisfy us that to our predecessors
we are indebted for much of what we thought
most our own, and that their errors were not wilful extravagances
or the ravings of insanity, but simply hypotheses,
justifiable as such at the time when they were propounded,
but which a fuller experience has proved to be inadequate.
It is only by the successive testing of hypotheses and
rejection of the false that truth is at last elicited. After all,
what we call truth is only the hypothesis which is found to
work best. Therefore in reviewing the opinions and practices
of ruder ages and races we shall do well to look with
leniency upon their errors as inevitable slips made in the
search for truth, and to give them the benefit of that indulgence
which we ourselves may one day stand in need of;
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cum excusatione itaque veteres audiendi sunt</foreign>.
</p>

<pb n='423'/><anchor id='Pg423'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Note. Not To Step Over Persons And Things.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note></head>

<p>
The superstition that harm is done to a person or thing by stepping
over him or it is very widely spread. Thus the Galelareese think
that if a man steps over your fishing-rod or your arrow, the fish will
not bite when you fish with that rod, and the game will not be hit
by that arrow when you shoot it. They say it is as if the implements
merely skimmed past the fish or the game.<note place='foot'>M. J. van Baarda, <q>Fabelen, Verhalen
en Overleveringen der Galelareezen,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en
Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>,
xlv. (1895) p. 513.</note> Similarly, if a
Highland sportsman saw a person stepping over his gun or fishing-rod,
he presumed but little on that day's diversion.<note place='foot'>John Ramsay, <hi rend='italic'>Scotland and Scotsmen
in the Eighteenth Century</hi> (Edinburgh,
1888), ii. 456.</note> When a Dacota
had bad luck in hunting, he would say that a woman had been
stepping over some part of the animal which he revered.<note place='foot'>H. R. Schoolcraft, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes</hi>,
ii. 175.</note> Amongst
many South African tribes it is considered highly improper to step
over a sleeper; if a wife steps over her husband he cannot hit his
enemy in war; if she steps over his assegais, they are from that time
useless, and are given to boys to play with.<note place='foot'>J. Macdonald, <hi rend='italic'>Light in Africa</hi>
(London, 1890), p. 209.</note> The Baganda think
that if a woman steps over a man's weapons, they will not aim straight
and will not kill, unless they have been first purified.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxii. (1902)
p. 59.</note> The Nandi
of British East Africa hold that to step over a snare or trap is to
court death and must be avoided at all risks; further, they are
of opinion that if a man were to step over a pot, he would fall to
pieces whenever the pot were broken.<note place='foot'>A. C. Hollis, <hi rend='italic'>The Nandi</hi>, pp. 24 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
36. In these cases the harm is thought
to fall on the person who steps over, not
on the thing which is stepped over.</note> The people of the Lower
Congo deem that to step over a person's body or legs will cause ill-luck
to that person and they are careful not to do so, especially
<pb n='424'/><anchor id='Pg424'/>
in passing men who are holding a palaver. At such times a passer-by
will shuffle his feet along the ground without lifting them in order
that he may not be charged with bringing bad luck on any one.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. H. Weeks, <q>Customs of
the Lower Congo People,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>,
xx. (1909) p. 474.</note> On
the other hand among the Wajagga of East Africa grandchildren
leap over the corpse of their grandfather, when it is laid out,
expressing a wish that they may live to be as old as he.<note place='foot'>B. Gutmann, <q>Trauer und Begräbnissitten
der Wadschagga,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>,
lxxxix. (1906) p. 199.</note> In Laos
hunters are careful never to step over their weapons.<note place='foot'>E. Aymonier, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage dans le Laos</hi>,
i. (Paris, 1895) p. 144.</note> The Tepehuanes
of Mexico believe that if anybody steps over them, they
will not be able to kill another deer in their lives.<note place='foot'>C. Lumholtz, <hi rend='italic'>Unknown Mexico</hi>
(London, 1903), i. 435.</note> Some of the
Australian aborigines are seriously alarmed if a woman steps over
them as they lie asleep on the ground.<note place='foot'>E. M. Curr, <hi rend='italic'>The Australian Race</hi>,
i. 50.</note> In the tribes about
Maryborough in Queensland, if a woman steps over anything that
belongs to a man he will throw it away.<note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of
South-East Australia</hi>, p. 402.</note> In New Caledonia it is
thought to endanger a canoe if a woman steps over the cable.<note place='foot'>Father Lambert, <hi rend='italic'>Mœurs et superstitions
des Néo-Calédoniens</hi>, pp. 192 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Everything that a Samoyed woman steps over becomes unclean and
must be fumigated.<note place='foot'>P. von Stenin, <q>Das Gewohnheitsrecht
der Samojeden,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lx.
(1891) p. 173.</note> Malagasy porters believe that if a woman
strides over their poles, the skin will certainly peel off the shoulders
of the bearers when next they take up the burden.<note place='foot'>J. Richardson, in <hi rend='italic'>Antananarivo
Annual and Madagascar Magazine</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Reprint of the First Four Numbers</hi>
(Antananarivo, 1885), p. 529; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Reprint
of the Second Four Numbers</hi> (Antananarivo,
1896), p. 296; J. Sibree,
<hi rend='italic'>The Great African Island</hi>, p. 288; compare
De Flacourt, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de la grande
isle Madagascar</hi> (Paris, 1658), p. 99.</note> The Cherokees
fancy that to step over a vine causes it to wither and bear no fruit.<note place='foot'>J. Mooney, <q>Myths of the Cherokee,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Nineteenth Annual Report of the
Bureau of American Ethnology</hi>, pt. i.
(Washington, 1900) p. 424.</note>
The Ba-Pendi and Ba-thonga of South Africa think that if a woman
steps over a man's legs, they will swell and he will not be able to
run.<note place='foot'>H. A. Junod, <q>Les Conceptions
physiologiques des Bantou sud-africains,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Revue d'Ethnographie et de
Sociologie</hi>, i. (1910) p. 138, note <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>.</note> According to the South Slavonians, the most serious maladies
may be communicated to a person by stepping over him, but they
can afterwards be cured by stepping over him in the reverse
direction.<note place='foot'>F. S. Krauss, <hi rend='italic'>Volksglaube und
religiöser Brauch der Südslaven</hi>, p. 52.</note> The belief that to step over a child hinders it from
growing is found in France, Belgium, Germany, Austria, and Syria;
in Syria, Germany, and Bohemia the mischief can be remedied by
stepping over the child in the opposite direction.<note place='foot'>See L. F. Sauvé, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore des
Hautes-Vosges</hi>, p. 226, compare pp.
219 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. Monseur, <hi rend='italic'>Le Folk-lore
Wallon</hi>, p. 39; A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der
deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> § 603; J.
W. Wolf, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur deutschen Mythologie</hi>,
i. p. 208, § 42; J. A. E.
Köhler, <hi rend='italic'>Volksbrauch</hi>, etc., <hi rend='italic'>im Voigtlande</hi>,
p. 423; A. Kuhn und W.
Schwartz, <hi rend='italic'>Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen
und Gebräuche</hi>, p. 462, § 461;
E. Krause, <q>Abergläubische Kuren
und sonstiger Aberglaube in Berlin,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</hi>, xv. (1883)
p. 85; R. H. Kaindl, <hi rend='italic'>Die Huzulen</hi>,
p. 5; J. V. Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben
und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</hi>,
p. 109, §§ 798, 799; Eijüb Abêla,
<q>Beiträge zur Kenntniss abergläubischer
Gebräuche in Syrien,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
des deutschen Palästina-Vereins</hi>,
vii. (1884) p. 81; compare B.
Chemali, <q>Naissance et premier âge au
Liban,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Anthropos</hi>, v. (1910) p. 741.</note>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='427'/><anchor id='Pg427'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index.</head>

<lg>
<l>Abdication of kings in favour of their infant children, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abduction of souls by demons, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abipones, the, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>changes in their language, <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abnormal mental states accounted inspiration, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abortion, superstition as to woman who has procured, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Absence and recall of the soul, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Achilles, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acts, tabooed, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adivi or forest Gollas, the, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aetolians, the, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Africa, fetish kings in West, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>names of animals and things tabooed in, <ref target='Pg400'>400</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agutainos, the, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Air, prohibition to be uncovered in the open, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Akamba, the, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Akikuyu, the, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>auricular confession among the, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albanians of the Caucasus, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alberti, L., <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alcmena and Hercules, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alfoors of Celebes, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Minahassa, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amboyna, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amenophis III., his birth represented on the monuments, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>American Indians, their fear of naming the dead, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ammon, Hanun, King of, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amoy, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amulets, knots used as, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rings as, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ancestors, names of, bestowed on their reincarnations, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reborn in their descendants, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ancestral spirits, cause sickness, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifices to, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Andaman Islanders, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Andania, mysteries of, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Angakok</hi>, Esquimaux wizard or sorcerer, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angoni, the, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Animals injured through their shadows, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>propitiation of spirits of slain, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>atonement for slain, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dangerous, not called by their proper names, <ref target='Pg396'>396</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to understand human speech, <ref target='Pg398'>398</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg400'>400</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Animism passing into religion, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anklets as amulets, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Annamites, the, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anointment of priests at installation, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antambahoaka, the, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ants, bites of, used in purificatory ceremony, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apaches, the, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apollo, purification of, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apuleius, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arab mode of cursing an enemy, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arabs of Moab, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Araucanians, the, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ares, men sacred to, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arikaras, the, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aristeas of Proconnesus, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Army under arms, prohibition to see, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arrows to keep off death, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aru Islands, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arunta, their belief as to the ghosts of the slain, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremonies at the end of mourning among the, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arval Brothers, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aryans, the primitive, their theory of personal names, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ashes strewn on the head, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ash-tree, parings of nails buried under an, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assam, taboos observed by headmen in, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hill tribes of, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Astarte at Hierapolis, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aston, W. G., <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Astrolabe Bay, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athens, kings at, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ritual of cursing at, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Atonement for slain animals, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Attiuoindarons, the, <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Atua</foreign>, ancestral spirit, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Augur's staff at Rome, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='428'/><anchor id='Pg428'/>

<lg>
<l>Auricular confession, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aurohuaca Indians, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Australian aborigines;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their conception of the soul, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>personal names kept secret among the, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their fear of naming the dead, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aversion of spirits and fairies to iron, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Avoidance of common words to deceive spirits or other beings, <ref target='Pg416'>416</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aymara Indians, the, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aztecs, the, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their priests, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babylonian witches and wizards, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bad Country, the, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Badham, Dr., <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baduwis, the, of Java, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bag, souls collected in a, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Baganda'/>
<l>Baganda, the, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; fishermen, taboos observed by, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Uganda'>Uganda</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bagba, a fetish, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bageshu, the, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bagobos, the, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bahima, the, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>names of their dead kings not mentioned, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bahnars of Cochin-China, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baking, continence observed at, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Balder, Norse god, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ba-Lua, the, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Banana-trees, fruit-bearing, hair deposited under, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bandages to prevent the escape of the soul, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bangala, the, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bangkok, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baoules, the, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ba-Pedi, the, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baron, R., <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baronga, the, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Basagala, the, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Basket, souls gathered into a, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bastian, A., <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Basutos, burial custom of the, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>purification of warriors among the, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Bathing'/>
<l>Bathing (washing) as a ceremonial purification, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref>, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ba-Thonga, the, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Battas'/>
<l>Battas or Bataks of Sumatra, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bavili, the, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bawenda, the, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bayazid, the Sultan, and his soul, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beans, prohibition to touch or name, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bear, the polar, taboos concerning, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>customs observed by Lapps after killing a, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bears not to be called by their proper names, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref>, <ref target='Pg402'>402</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bechuanas, purification of manslayers among the, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bed, feet of, smeared with mud, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prohibition to sleep in a, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beef and milk not to be eaten at the same meal, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beer, continence observed at brewing, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bells as talismans, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Benin, kings of, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bentley, R., <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Besisis, the, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beveridge, P., <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bird, soul conceived as a, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Birds, ghosts of slain as, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cause headache through clipped hair, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Birth from a golden image, pretence of, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>premature, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Miscarriage'>Miscarriage</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bismarck Archipelago, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bites of ants used as purificatory ceremony, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blackening faces of warriors, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of manslayers, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blackfoot Indians, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Black Mountain of southern France, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; ox or black ram in magic, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bladders, annual festival of, among the Esquimaux, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Blessers</q> or sacred kings, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blood put on doorposts, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of slain, supposed effect of it on the slayer, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>smeared on person as a purification, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>drawn from bodies of manslayers, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tabooed, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not eaten, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>soul in the, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of game poured out, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>royal, not to be shed on the ground, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unwillingness to shed, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>received on bodies of kinsfolk, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>drops of, effaced, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>horror of, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of chief sacred, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of women, dread of, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of childbirth, supposed dangerous infection of, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>received on heads of friends or slaves, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -lickers, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blowing upon knots, as a charm, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boa-constrictor, purification of man who has killed a, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boars, wild, not to be called by their proper names, <ref target='Pg411'>411</ref>, <ref target='Pg415'>415</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boas, Dr. Franz, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bodia or Bodio, a West African pontiff or fetish king, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bodies, souls transferred to other, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bodos, the, of Assam, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boiled flesh tabooed, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='429'/><anchor id='Pg429'/>

<lg>
<l>Bolang Mongondo, a district in Celebes, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bonds, no man in bonds allowed in priest's house, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bones of human bodies which have been eaten, special treatment of, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the dead, their treatment after the decay of the flesh, <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>5</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of dead disinterred and scraped, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boobies, the, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Born again, pretence of being, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bornu, Sultan of, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bororos, the, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bourke, Captain J. G., <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Box, strayed soul caught in, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bracelets as amulets, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brahman student, his cut hair and nails, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brahmans, their common and secret names, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Branches used in exorcism, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Breath of chief sacred, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Breathing on a person as a mode of purification, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brewing, continence observed at, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bribri Indians, their ideas as to the uncleanness of women, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bride and bridegrooms, all knots on their garments unloosed, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bronze employed in expiatory rites, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>6</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>priests to be shaved with, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; knife to cut priest's hair, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brother and sister not allowed to mention each other's names, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brothers-in-law, their names not to be pronounced, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref>, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref>, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buddha, Footprint of, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Building shadows into foundations, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Bukuru</foreign>, unclean, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bulgarian building custom, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burghead, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Burial'/>
<l>Burial under a running stream, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; customs to prevent the escape of the soul, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Burials'/>
<l>Burials, customs as to shadows at, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burma, kings of, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burmese conception of the soul as a butterfly, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burning cut hair and nails to prevent them being used in sorcery, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buryat shaman, his mode of recovering lost souls, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Butterfly, the soul as a, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cacongo, King of, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caffre customs at circumcision, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caffres, <q>women's speech</q> among the, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calabar, fetish king at, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calabashes, souls shut up in, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calchaquis Indians, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Californian Indians, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cambodia, kings of, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Camden, W., <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Campbell, J., <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Camphor, special language employed by searchers for, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canelos Indians, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cannibalism at hair-cutting, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cannibals, taboos imposed on, among the Kwakiutl, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canoe, fish offered to, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canoes, continence observed at building, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Captives killed and eaten, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carayahis, the, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caribou, taboos concerning, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caribs, difference of language between men and women among the, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caroline Islands, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caron's <hi rend='italic'>Account of Japan</hi>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carrier Indians, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catat, Dr., <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catlin, G., <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cats with stumpy tails, reason of, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cattle, continence observed for sake of, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>protected against wolves by charms, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caul-fat extracted by Australian enemies, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Cauld airn,</q> <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cazembes, the, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celebes, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hooking souls in, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celibacy of holy milkmen, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ceremonial purity observed in war, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ceremonies at the reception of strangers, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at entering a strange land, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>purificatory, on return from a journey, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>observed after slaughter of panthers, lions, bears, serpents, etc., <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at hair-cutting, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cetchwayo, King, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chams, the, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Change of language caused by taboo on the names of the dead, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>caused by taboo on names of chiefs and kings, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of names to deceive ghosts, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charms to facilitate childbirth, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chastity. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Continence'>Continence</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Chegilla</foreign>, taboo, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cheremiss, the, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cherokee sorcery with spittle, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chiefs, foods tabooed to, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>names of, tabooed, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref>, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and kings tabooed, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sacred, not allowed to leave their
<pb n='430'/><anchor id='Pg430'/>
enclosures, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regarded as dangerous, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Child and father, supposed danger of resemblance between, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Child's nails bitten off, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Childbed, taboos imposed on women in, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Childbirth'/>
<l>Childbirth, precautions taken with mother at, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>women tabooed at, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>confession of sins as a means of expediting, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>women after, their hair shaved and burnt, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>homoeopathic magic to facilitate, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>knots untied at, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Children, young, tabooed, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>parents named after their, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chiloe, Indians of, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>China, custom at funerals in, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Emperor of, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chitomé or Chitombé, a pontiff of Congo, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chittagong, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Choctaws, the, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chuckchees, the, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Circumcision customs among the Caffres, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>performed with flints, not iron, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Australia, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Circumlocutions adopted to avoid naming the dead, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref>, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref>, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>employed by reapers, <ref target='Pg412'>412</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cities, guardian deities of, evoked by enemies, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clasping of hands forbidden, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Clavie</foreign>, the, at Burghead, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cleanliness fostered by superstition, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>personal, observed in war, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clippings of hair, magic wrought through, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref>, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clotaire, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clothes of sacred persons tabooed, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cloths used to catch souls, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clotilde, Queen, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cobra, ceremonies after killing a, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coco-nut oil made by chaste women, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Codjour</foreign>, a priestly king, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coins, portraits of kings not stamped on, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Comanches, the, <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Combing the hair forbidden, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to cause storms, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Combs of sacred persons, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Common objects, names of, changed when they are the names of the dead, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>, or the names of chiefs and kings, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; words tabooed, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Concealment of miscarriage in childbed, supposed effects of, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Concealment of personal names from fear of magic, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conciliating the spirits of the land, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conduct, standard of, shifted from natural to supernatural basis, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Confession of sins, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>originally a magical ceremony, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Connaught, kings of, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Consummation of marriage prevented by knots and locks, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Contagious magic, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Continence'/>
<l>Continence enjoined on people during the rounds of sacred pontiff, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Zapotec priests, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of priests, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; observed on eve of period of taboo, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by those who have handled the dead, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>during war, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>after victory, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by cannibals, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by fishers and hunters, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by workers in salt-pans, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at brewing beer, wine, and poison, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at baking, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at making coco-nut oil, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at building canoes, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at house-building, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at making or repairing dams, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on trading voyages, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>after festivals, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on journeys, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>while cattle are at pasture, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by lion-killers and bear-killers, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>before handling holy relics, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by tabooed men, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cooking, taboos as to, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coptic church, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>5</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Cords'/>
<l>Cords, knotted, in magic, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corea, clipped hair burned in, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; kings of, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be touched with iron, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corpses, knots not allowed about, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cousins, male and female, not allowed to mention each other's names, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Covenant, spittle used in making a, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Covering up mirrors at a death, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cow bewitched, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cowboy of the king of Unyoro, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Creek Indians, the, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their war customs, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crevaux, J., <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Criminals shaved as a mode of purification, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crocodiles not called by their proper names, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref>, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref>, <ref target='Pg411'>411</ref>, <ref target='Pg415'>415</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crossing of legs forbidden, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crown, imperial, as palladium, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crystals used in divination, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Curr, E. M., <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cursing at Athens, ritual of, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; an enemy, Arab mode of, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='431'/><anchor id='Pg431'/>

<lg>
<l>Curtains to conceal kings, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cut hair and nails, disposal of, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Cuts'/>
<l>Cuts made in the body as a mode of expelling demons or ghosts, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in bodies of manslayers, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in bodies of slain, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>. <hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Incisions'>Incisions</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cutting the hair a purificatory ceremony, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cynaetha, people of, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyzicus, council chamber at, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dacotas, the, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dahomey, the King of, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>royal family of, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kings of, their <q>strong names,</q> <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dairi, the, or Mikado of Japan, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dairies, sacred, of the Todas, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dairymen, sacred, of the Todas, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Damaras, the, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dams, continence at making or repairing, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dance of king, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of successful head-hunters, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dances of victory, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Danger of being overshadowed by certain birds or people, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed, of portraits and photographs, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed to attend contact with divine or sacred persons, such as chiefs and kings, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Darfur, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sultan of, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dassera, festival of the, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Daughter-in-law, her name not to be pronounced, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>David and the King of Moab, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dawson, J., <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dead, sacrifices to the, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taboos on persons who have handled the, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>souls of the dead all malignant, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>names of the dead tabooed, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to name the dead a serious crime, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>names of the dead not borne by the living, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reincarnation or resurrection of the dead in their namesakes, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festivals of the, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref>, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; body, prohibition to touch, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Death, natural, of sacred king or priest, supposed fatal consequences of, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kept off by arrows, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mourners forbidden to sleep in house after a death, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom of covering up mirrors at a, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>from imagination, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Debt of civilisation to savagery, <ref target='Pg421'>421</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Defiled hands, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Hands'>Hands</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>De Groot, J. J. M., <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Demons, abduction of souls by, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of disease expelled by pungent spices, pricks, and cuts, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and ghosts averse to iron, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Devils, abduction of souls by, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dido, her magical rites, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diet of kings and priests regulated, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dieterich, A., <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Difference of language between husbands and wives, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>between men and women, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diminution of shadow regarded with apprehension, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dio Chrysostom, on fame as a shadow, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diodorus Siculus, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dionysus in the city, festival of, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Disease, demons of, expelled by pungent spices, pricks, and cuts, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Disenchanting strangers, various modes of, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dishes, effect of eating out of sacred, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of sacred persons tabooed, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Vessels'>Vessels</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Disposal of cut hair and nails, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Divination by shoulder-blades of sheep, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Divinities, human, bound by many rules, <ref target='Pg419'>419</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Divorce of spiritual from temporal power, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dobrizhoffer, Father M., <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>, <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dog, prohibition to touch or name, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dogs, bones of game kept from, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unclean, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tigers called, <ref target='Pg402'>402</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dolls or puppets employed for the restoration of souls to their bodies, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doorposts, blood put on, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doors opened to facilitate childbirth, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref>, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to facilitate death, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doubles, spiritual, of men and animals, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doutté, E., <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dreams, absence of soul in, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief of savages in the reality of, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>omens drawn from, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Drinking and eating, taboos on, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>modes of drinking for tabooed persons, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Drought supposed to be caused by a concealed miscarriage, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dugong fishing, taboos in connexion with, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dyaks, the Sea, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their modes of recalling the soul, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taboos observed by head-hunters among the, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eagle, soul in form of, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -hunters, taboos observed by, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='432'/><anchor id='Pg432'/>

<lg>
<l>Eagle-wood, special language employed by searchers for, <ref target='Pg404'>404</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eating out of sacred vessels, supposed effect of, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and drinking, taboos on, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fear of being seen in the act of, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eggs offered to demons, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reason for breaking shells of, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egypt, rules of life observed by ancient kings of, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egyptian magicians, their power of compelling the deities, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egyptians, the ancient, their conception of the soul, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their practice as to souls of the dead, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>personal names among, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elder brother, his name not to be pronounced, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elder-tree, cut hair and nails inserted in an, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elephant-hunters, special language employed by, <ref target='Pg404'>404</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eleusinian priests, their names sacred, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elfin race averse to iron, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Emetic as mode of purification, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>pretended, in auricular confession, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Emin Pasha, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epidemics attributed to evil spirits, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epimenides, the Cretan seer, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Esquimaux'/>
<l>Esquimaux, their conception of the soul, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their dread of being photographed, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>or Inuit, taboos observed by hunters among the, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>namesakes of the dead among the, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esthonians, the, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ethical evolution, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; precepts developed out of savage taboos, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ethiopia, kings of, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euphemisms employed for certain animals, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for smallpox, <ref target='Pg400'>400</ref>, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref>, <ref target='Pg411'>411</ref>, <ref target='Pg416'>416</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Europe, south-eastern, superstitions as to shadows in, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evil eye, the, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ewe-speaking peoples of the Slave Coast, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rebirth of ancestors among the, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Execution, peculiar modes of, for members of royal families, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Executioners, customs observed by, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exorcising harmful influence of strangers, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eye, the evil, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eyeos, the, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Faces veiled to avert evil influences, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of warriors blackened, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of manslayers blackened, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Fàdy</foreign>, taboo, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fafnir and Sigurd, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fairies averse to iron, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fasting, custom of, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Father and child, supposed danger of resemblance between, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and mother, their names not to be mentioned, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; in-law, his name not to be pronounced by his daughter-in-law, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by his son-in-law, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref>, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref>, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fathers named after their children, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Faunus, consultation of, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Feast of Yams, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Feathers worn by manslayers, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Feet'/>
<l>Feet, not to wet the, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>. <hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Foot'>Foot</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fernando Po, taboos observed by the kings of, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Festival of the Dead among the Hurons, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fetish or taboo rajah, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; kings in West Africa, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fever, euphemism for, <ref target='Pg400'>400</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Field speech,</q> a special jargon employed by reapers, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg411'>411</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fiji, catching away souls in, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>War King and Sacred King in, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom as to remains of food in, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fijian chief, supposed effect of using his dishes or clothes, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; conception of the soul, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; custom of frightening away ghosts, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; notion of absence of the soul in dreams, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fingers cut off as a sacrifice, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Finnish hunters, <ref target='Pg398'>398</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fire, rule as to removing fire from priest's house, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prohibition to blow the fire with the breath, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in purificatory rites, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tabooed, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>new, made by friction, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Water, kingships of, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Firefly, soul in form of, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>First-fruits, offering of, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fish-traps, continence observed at making, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fishermen, words tabooed by, <ref target='Pg394'>394</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg396'>396</ref>, <ref target='Pg408'>408</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg415'>415</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fishers and hunters tabooed, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fison, Rev. Lorimer, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fits and convulsions set down to demons, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flamen Dialis, taboos observed by the, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref>, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='433'/><anchor id='Pg433'/>

<lg>
<l>Flaminica, rules observed by the, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flannan Islands, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flesh, boiled, not to be eaten by tabooed persons, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diet restricted or forbidden, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flints, not iron, cuts to be made with, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of, prescribed in ritual, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sharp, circumcision performed with, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fly, soul in form of, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Food, remnants of, buried as a precaution against sorcery, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>magic wrought by means of refuse of, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taboos on leaving food over, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be touched with hands, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objection to have food over head, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Foods tabooed, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Foot'/>
<l>Foot, custom of going with only one foot shod, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Feet'>Feet</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Footprint in magic, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Buddha, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Forgetfulness, pretence of, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Forks used in eating by tabooed persons, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fors, the, of Central Africa, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Foundation sacrifices, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fowl used in exorcism, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fowlers, words tabooed by, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref>, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Foxes not to be mentioned by their proper names, <ref target='Pg396'>396</ref>, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frankish kings, their unshorn hair, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fresh meat tabooed, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fumigation as a mode of ceremonial purification, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Funerals in China, custom as to shadows at, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>. <hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Burial'>Burial</ref>, <ref target='Index-Burials'>Burials</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Furfo, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gabriel, the archangel, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Gangas</foreign>, fetish priests, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Garments, effect of wearing sacred, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gates, sacrifice of human beings at foundations of, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gatschet, A. S., <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gauntlet, running the, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Genitals of murdered people eaten, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Getae, priestly kings of the, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ghost of husband kept from his widow, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fear of evoking the ghost by mentioning his name, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>chased into the grave at the end of mourning, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ghosts, sacrifices to, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>draw away the souls of their kinsfolk, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>draw out men's shadows, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as guardians of gates, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kept off by thorns, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and demons averse to iron, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fear of wounding, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>swept out of house, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>names changed in order to deceive ghosts or to avoid attracting their attention, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ghosts of animals, dread of, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the slain haunt their slayers, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fear of the, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifices to, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>scaring away the, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as birds, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gilyaks, the, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ginger in purificatory rites, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gingiro, kingdom of, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Girls at puberty obliged to touch everything in house, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their hair torn out, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goajiro Indians, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goat, prohibition to touch or name, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transference of guilt to, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -sucker, shadow of the, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>God, <q>the most great name</q> of, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -man a source of danger, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bound by many rules, <ref target='Pg419'>419</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gods, their names tabooed, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Xenophanes on the, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human, bound by many rules, <ref target='Pg419'>419</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> Myths</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gold excluded from some temples, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>8</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and silver as totems, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; mines, spirits of the, treated with deference, <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goldie, H., <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gollas, the, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Good Friday, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goorkhas, the, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gordian knot, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gran Chaco, Indians of the, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grandfathers, grandsons named after their deceased, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grandidier, A., <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grandmothers, granddaughters named after their deceased, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grass knotted as a charm, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grave, soul fetched from, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -clothes, no knots in, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -diggers, taboos observed by, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Graves, food offered on, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>water poured on, as a rain-charm, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Great Spirit, sacrifice of fingers to the, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grebo people of Sierra Leone, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greek conception of the soul, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; customs as to manslayers, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grey, Sir George, <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Grihya-Sûtras</foreign>, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grimm, J., <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ground, prohibition to touch the, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to sit on the, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to set foot on, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>royal blood not to be shed on the, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guardian deities of cities, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='434'/><anchor id='Pg434'/>

<lg>
<l>Guaycurus, the, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guiana, Indians of, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gypsy superstition about portraits, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haida medicine-men, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hair, mode of cutting the Mikado's, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cut with bronze knife, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of manslayers shaved, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of slain enemy, fetish made from, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be combed, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tabooed, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of kings, priests, and wizards unshorn, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regarded as the seat of a god or spirit, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kept unshorn at certain times, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offered to rivers, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of children unshorn, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>magic wrought through clippings of, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref>, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cut or combed out may cause rain and thunderstorms, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>clippings of, used as hostages, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>infected by virus of taboo, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cut as a purificatory ceremony, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of women after childbirth shaved and burnt, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>loosened at childbirth, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>loosened in magical and religious ceremonies, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and nails of sacred persons not cut, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and nails, cut, disposal of, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deposited on or under trees, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deposited in sacred places, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>stowed away in any secret place, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kept for use at the resurrection, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt to prevent them from falling into the hands of sorcerers, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -cutting, ceremonies at, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Hands'/>
<l>Hands tabooed, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>food not to be touched with, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defiled, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be clasped, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hanun, King of Moab, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hawaii, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>customs as to chiefs and shadows in, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Head, stray souls restored to, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prohibition to touch the, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>plastered with mud, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the human, regarded as sacred, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tabooed, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed to be the residence of spirits, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objection to have any one overhead, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>washing the, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -hunters, customs of, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Headache caused by clipped hair, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heads of manslayers shaved, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hearne, S., quoted, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hebesio, god of thunder, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hercules and Alcmena, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herero, the, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hermotimus of Clazomenae, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hidatsa Indians, taboos observed by eagle-hunters among the, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hierapolis, temple of Astarte at, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hiro, thief-god, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Historical tradition hampered by the taboo on the names of the dead, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holiness and pollution not differentiated by savages, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hollis, A. C., <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holy water, sprinkling with, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Homicides. See <ref target='Index-Manslayers'>Manslayers</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Homoeopathic magic, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Honey-wine, continence observed at brewing, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hooks to catch souls, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horse, prohibition to see a, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prohibition to ride, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hos of Togoland, the, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hostages, clipped hair used as, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hottentots, the, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>House, ceremony at entering a new, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taboos on quitting the, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; building, custom as to shadows at, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>continence observed at, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Howitt, A. W., <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huichol Indians, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Human gods bound by many rules, <ref target='Pg419'>419</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sacrifices at foundation of buildings, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Humbe, a kingdom of Angola, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hunters use knots as charms, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>words tabooed by, <ref target='Pg396'>396</ref>, <ref target='Pg398'>398</ref>, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref>, <ref target='Pg400'>400</ref>, <ref target='Pg402'>402</ref>, <ref target='Pg404'>404</ref>, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and fishers tabooed, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hurons, the, <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their conception of the soul, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their Festival of the Dead, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Husband's ghost kept from his widow, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; name not to be pronounced by his wife, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Husbands and wives, difference of language between, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huzuls, the, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ilocanes of Luzon, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Imagination, death from, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Imitative or homoeopathic magic, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Impurity of manslayers, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Incas of Peru, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Incisions'/>
<l>Incisions made in bodies of warriors as a preparation for war, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in bodies of slain, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in bodies of manslayers, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Cuts'>Cuts</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='435'/><anchor id='Pg435'/>

<lg>
<l>Incontinence of young people supposed to be fatal to the king, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>India, names of animals tabooed in, <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indians of North America, their customs on the war-path, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their fear of naming the dead, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Infants tabooed, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Infection, supposed, of lying-in women, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Infidelity of wife supposed to be fatal to hunter, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Initiation, custom of covering the mouth after, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taboos observed by novices at, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>new names given at, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Injury to a man's shadow conceived as an injury to the man, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inspiration, primitive theory of, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Intercourse with wives enjoined before war, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>enjoined on manslayers, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>. <hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Continence'>Continence</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Intoxication accounted inspiration, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inuit. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Esquimaux'>Esquimaux</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ireland, taboos observed by the ancient kings of, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Irish custom as to a fall, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as to friends' blood, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iron not to be touched, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tabooed, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used as a charm against spirits, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; instruments, use of, tabooed, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; rings as talismans, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iroquois, the, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isis and Ra, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Israelites, rules of ceremonial purity observed by the Israelites in war, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Issini, the, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Itonamas, the, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ivy, prohibition to touch or name, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ja-Luo, the, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jackals, tigers called, <ref target='Pg402'>402</ref>, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jackson, Professor Henry, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Japan, the Mikado of, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Kaempfer's history of, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Caron's account of, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jars, souls conjured into, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jason and Pelias, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Java, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jebu, the king of, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jewish hunters, their customs as to blood of game, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jinn, the servants of their magical names, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Journey, purificatory ceremonies on return from a, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>continence observed on a, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hair kept unshorn on a, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Jumping'/>
<l>Jumping over wife or children as a ceremony, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Juno Lucina, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Junod, H. A., <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg420'>420</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jupiter Liber, temple of, at Furfo, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Ka</foreign>, the ancient Egyptian, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kachins of Burma, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kaempfer's <hi rend='italic'>History of Japan</hi>, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kafirs of the Hindoo Koosh, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>6</hi>, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kaitish, the, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kalamba, the, a chief in the Congo region, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Kami</foreign>, the Japanese word for god, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kamtchatkans, their attempts to deceive mice, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Karaits, the, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Karen-nis of Burma, the, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Karens, the Red, of Burma, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their recall of the soul, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their customs at funerals, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Karo-Bataks, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>. <hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Battas'>Battas</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Katikiro</foreign>, the, of Uganda, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kavirondo, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kayans of Borneo, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kei Islanders, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kenyahs of Borneo, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg415'>415</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Key as symbol of delivery in childbed, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Keys'/>
<l>Keys as charms against devils and ghosts, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as amulets, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>. <hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Locks'>Locks</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khonds, rebirth of ancestors among the, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kickapoos, the, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kidd, Dudley, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>King not to be overshadowed, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Night, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>King's Evil, the, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kings, supernatural powers attributed to, <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>beaten before their coronation, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>forbidden to see their mothers, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>portraits of, not stamped on coins, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>guarded against the magic of strangers, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>forbidden to use foreign goods, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be seen eating and drinking, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>concealed by curtains, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>forbidden to leave their palaces, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>compelled to dance, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>punished or put to death, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be touched, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their hair unshorn, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>foods tabooed to, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>names of, tabooed, <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taboos observed by, identical with those observed by commoners, <ref target='Pg419'>419</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kings and chiefs tabooed, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their spittle guarded against sorcerers, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; fetish or religious, in West Africa, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='436'/><anchor id='Pg436'/>

<lg>
<l>Kingsley, Miss Mary H., <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kiowa Indians, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>, <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Klallam Indians, the, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Knife as charm against spirits, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Knives not to be left edge upwards, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not used at funeral banquets, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Knot, the Gordian, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Knots, prohibition to wear, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>untied at childbirth, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to prevent the consummation of marriage, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to cause sickness, disease, and all kinds of misfortune, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used to cure disease, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used to win a lover or capture a runaway slave, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq</hi>.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used as protective amulets, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used as charms by hunters and travellers, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a charm to protect corn from devils, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on corpses untied, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and locks, magical virtue of, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref>, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and rings tabooed, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Koita, the, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Koryak, the, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kruijt, A. C., <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kublai Khan, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kukulu, a priestly king, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kwakiutl, the, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>customs observed by cannibals among the, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>change of names in summer and winter among the, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Kwun</foreign>, the spirit of the head, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed to reside in the hair, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lafitau, J. F., <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lampong in Sumatra, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lamps to light the ghosts to their old homes, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Language of husbands and wives, difference between, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref> sq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of men and women, difference between, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; change of, caused by taboo on the names of the dead, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>caused by taboo on the names of chiefs and kings, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; special, employed by hunters, <ref target='Pg396'>396</ref>, <ref target='Pg398'>398</ref>, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref>, <ref target='Pg400'>400</ref>, <ref target='Pg402'>402</ref>, <ref target='Pg404'>404</ref>, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>employed by searchers for eagle-wood and <hi rend='italic'>lignum aloes</hi>, <ref target='Pg404'>404</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>employed by searchers for camphor, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>employed by miners, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref>, <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>employed by reapers at harvest, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg411'>411</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>employed by sailors at sea, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laos, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lapps, the, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their customs after killing a bear, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rebirth of ancestors among the, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Latuka, the, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leaning against a tree prohibited to warriors, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leavened bread, prohibition to touch, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leaving food over, taboos on, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leavings of food, magic wrought by means of, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Legs not to be crossed, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leinster, kings of, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Leleen</foreign>, the, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lengua Indians of the Gran Chaco, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leonard, A. G., Major, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lesbos, building custom in, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lewis, Rev. Thomas, <ref target='Pg420'>420</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Life in the blood, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Limbs, amputated, kept by the owners against the resurrection, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lion-killer, purification of, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lions not called by their proper names, <ref target='Pg400'>400</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lithuanians, the old, their funeral banquets, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liver, induration of the, attributed to touching sacred chief, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lizard, soul in form of, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loango, taboos observed by kings of, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taboos observed by heir to throne of, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; king of, forbidden to see a white man's house, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be seen eating or drinking, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>confined to his palace, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>refuse of his food buried, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Locks'/>
<l>Locks unlocked at childbirth, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to prevent the consummation of marriage, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as amulets, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unlocked to facilitate death, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and knots, magical virtue of, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Keys'>Keys</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lolos, the, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Look back, not to, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loom, men not allowed to touch a, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loss of the shadow regarded as ominous, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lovers won by knots, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucan, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucian, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucina, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>, <ref target='Pg398'>398</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucky names, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lycaeus, sanctuary of Zeus on Mount, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lycosura, sanctuary of the Mistress at, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lying-in women, dread of, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mack, an adventurer, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macusi Indians, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Madagascar, names of chiefs and kings tabooed in, <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Magic'/>
<l>Magic wrought by means of refuse of food, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sympathetic, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>homoeopathic,
<pb n='437'/><anchor id='Pg437'/>
<ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>contagious, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wrought through clippings of hair, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref>, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wrought on a man through his name, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magicians, Egyptian, their power of compelling the deities, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mahafalys of Madagascar, the, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Makalaka, the, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Makololo, the, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malagasy language, dialectical variations of, <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malanau tribes of Borneo, <ref target='Pg406'>406</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malay conception of the soul as a bird, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>&mdash;&mdash; miners, fowlers, and fishermen, special forms of speech employed by, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>&mdash;&mdash; Peninsula, art of abducting human souls in the, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maldives, the, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mandalay, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mandan Indians, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mandelings of Sumatra, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mangaia, separation of religious and civil authority in, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mangaians, the, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manipur, hill tribes of, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mannikin, the soul conceived as a, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Manslayers'/>
<l>Manslayers, purification of, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>secluded, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tabooed, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>haunted by ghosts of slain, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their faces blackened, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their bodies painted, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their hair shaved, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maori chiefs, their sanctity or taboo, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their heads sacred, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>&mdash;&mdash; language, synonyms in the, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maoris, persons who have handled the dead tabooed among the, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tabooed on the war-path, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marco Polo, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marianne Islands, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mariner, W., quoted, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mariners at sea, special language employed by, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marquesans, the, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their regard for the sanctity of the head, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their customs as to the hair, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their dread of sorcery, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marquesas Islands, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marriage, the consummation of, prevented by knots and locks, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Masai, the, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref>, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref>, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Matthews, Dr. Washington, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meal sprinkled to keep off evil spirits, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Measuring shadows, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>&mdash;&mdash; -tape deified, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mecca, pilgrims to, not allowed to wear knots and rings, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Medes, law of the, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mekeo district of New Guinea, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Men injured through their shadows, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>&mdash;&mdash; and women, difference of language between, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menedemus, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menstruation, women tabooed at, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menstruous women, dread of, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>avoidance of, by hunters, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mentras, the, <ref target='Pg404'>404</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Merolla da Sorrento, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mice thought to understand human speech, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be called by their proper names, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref>, <ref target='Pg415'>415</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Midas and his ass's ears, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>king of Gordium, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mikado, rules of life of the, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed effect of using his dishes or clothes, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the cutting of his hair and nails, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mikados, their relations to the Tycoons, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miklucho-Maclay, Baron N. von, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milk, custom as to drinking, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prohibition to drink, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be drunk by wounded men, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wine called, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and beef not to be eaten at the same meal, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milkmen of the Todas, taboos observed by the holy, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miller, Hugh, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Minahassa, a district of Celebes, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Alfoors of, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Minangkabauers of Sumatra, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miners, special language employed by, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref>, <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mirrors, superstitions as to, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>covered after a death, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Miscarriage'/>
<l>Miscarriage in childbed, dread of, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed danger of concealing a, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moab, Arabs of, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their custom of shaving prisoners, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moabites, King David's treatment of the, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mohammed bewitched by a Jew, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mongols, their recall of the soul, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred books of the, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montezuma, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monumbos, the, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mooney, J., <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moquis, the, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moral guilt regarded as a corporeal pollution, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morality developed out of taboo, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shifted from a natural to a supernatural basis, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>survival of savage taboos in civilised, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morice, A. G., <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mosyni or Mosynoeci, the, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='438'/><anchor id='Pg438'/>

<lg>
<l>Mother-in-law, the savage's dread of his, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her name not to be mentioned by her son-in-law, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref>, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref>, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mothers, African kings forbidden to see their, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>named after their children, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref>, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mourners, customs observed by, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tabooed, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bodies of, smeared with mud or clay, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hair and nails of, cut at end of mourning, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mourning of slayers for the slain, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mouse, soul in form of, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mouth closed to prevent escape of soul, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>soul in the, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>covered to prevent entrance of demons, etc., <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Muata Jamwo, the, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mud smeared on feet of bed, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>plastered on head, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Munster, kings of, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Murderers, taboos imposed on, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Murrams, the, of Manipur, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Muysca Indians, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Myths of gods and spirits to be told only in spring and summer, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to be told only in winter, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be told by day, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nails, prohibition to cut finger-nails, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of children not pared, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and hair, cut, disposal of, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deposited in sacred places, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>stowed away in any secret place, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kept for use at the resurrection, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt to prevent them from falling into the hands of sorcerers, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nails, iron, used as charms against fairies, demons, and ghosts, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; parings of, used in rain-charms, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>swallowed by treaty-makers, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Name, the personal, regarded as a vital part of the man, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identified with the soul, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the same, not to be borne by two living persons, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Names of relations tabooed, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>changed to deceive ghosts, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of common objects changed when they are the names of the dead, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>, or the names of chiefs and kings, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of ancestors bestowed on their reincarnations, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of kings and chiefs tabooed, <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of supernatural beings tabooed, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of gods tabooed, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of spirits and gods, magical virtue of, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Roman gods not to be mentioned, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lucky, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of dangerous animals not to be mentioned, <ref target='Pg396'>396</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Names, new, given to the sick and old, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>new, at initiation, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the dead tabooed, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not borne by the living, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>revived after a time, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; personal, tabooed, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kept secret from fear of magic, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>different in summer and winter, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Namesakes of the dead change their names to avoid attracting the attention of the ghost, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of deceased persons regarded as their reincarnations, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Naming the dead a serious crime, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref>, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of children, solemnities at the, connected with belief in the reincarnation of ancestors in their namesakes, <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Namosi, in Fiji, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nandi, the, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref>, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nanumea, island of, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Narbrooi, a spirit or god, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Narcissus and his reflection, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Narrinyeri, the, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Natchez, customs of manslayers among the, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Nats</hi>, demons, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Natural death of sacred king or priest, supposed fatal consequences of, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Navajo Indians, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Navel-string used to recall the soul, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nazarite, vow of the, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nelson, E. W., <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nets to catch souls, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as amulets, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref>, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>New Britain, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Caledonia, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; everything, excites awe of savages, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; fire made by friction, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Hebrides, the, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; names given to the sick and old, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at initiation, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Zealand, sanctity of chiefs in, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nias, island of, conception of the soul in, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom of the people of, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>special language of hunters in, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>special language employed by reapers in, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicknames used in order to avoid the use of the real names, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref>, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicobar Islands, customs as to shadows at burials in the, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicobarese, the, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>changes in their language, <ref target='Pg362'>362</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nieuwenhuis, Dr. A. W., <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Night, King of the, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nine knots in magic, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Noon, sacrifices to the dead at, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstitious dread of, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nootka Indians, their idea of the soul,
<pb n='439'/><anchor id='Pg439'/>
<ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>customs of girls at puberty among the, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their preparation for war, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>North American Indians, their dread of menstruous women, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their theory of names, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Norway, superstition as to parings of nails in, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nose stopped to prevent the escape of the soul, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nostrils, soul supposed to escape by the, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Novelties excite the awe of savages, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Novices at initiation, taboos observed by, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nubas, the, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nufoors of New Guinea, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref>, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>, <ref target='Pg415'>415</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Obscene language in ritual, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>O'Donovan, E., <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oesel, island of, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ojebways, the, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oldfield, A., <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Omahas, customs as to murderers among the, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Omens, reliance on, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>One shoe on and one shoe off, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ongtong Java Islands, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Onitsha, the king of, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Opening everything in house to facilitate childbirth, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orestes, the matricide, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oro, war god, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orotchis, the, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ot Danoms, the, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ottawa Indians, the, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ovambo, the, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Overshadowed, danger of being, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ovid, on loosening the hair, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ox, purification by passing through the body of an, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Padlocks as amulets, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Painting bodies of manslayers, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palaces, kings not allowed to leave their, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Pantang</hi>, taboo, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Panther, ceremonies at the slaughter of a, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parents named after their children, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -in-law, their names not to be pronounced, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Partition of spiritual and temporal power between religious and civil kings, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patagonians, the, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paton, W. R., <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pawnees, the, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peace, ceremony at making, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pelias and Jason, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pentateuch, the, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pepper in purificatory rites, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perils of the soul, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perseus and the Gorgon, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Persian kings, their custom at meals, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Persons, tabooed, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philosophy, primitive, <ref target='Pg420'>420</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Phong long</hi>, ill luck caused by women in childbed, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Photographed or painted, supposed danger of being, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pictures, supposed danger of, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pig, the word unlucky, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pigeons, special language employed by Malays in snaring, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pilgrims to Mecca not allowed to wear knots and rings, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pimas, the purification of manslayers among the, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plataea, Archon of, forbidden to touch iron, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>escape of besieged from, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pliny on crossed legs and clasped hands, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on knotted threads, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plutarch, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poison, continence observed at brewing, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; ordeal, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polar bear, taboos concerning the, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polemarch, the, at Athens, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pollution or sanctity, their equivalence in primitive religion, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and holiness not differentiated by savages, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polynesia, names of chiefs tabooed in, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polynesian chiefs sacred, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Pons Sublicius</foreign>, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Port Moresby, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Porto Novo, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Portraits, souls in, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed dangers of, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Powers, S., <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pregnancy, husband's hair kept unshorn during wife's, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conduct of husband during wife's, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstitions as to knots during wife's, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pregnant women, their superstitions about shadows, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Premature birth, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Miscarriage</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pricking patient with needles to expel demons of disease, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priests to be shaved with bronze, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their hair unshorn, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>foods tabooed to, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prisoners shaved, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>released at festivals, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Propitiation of the souls of the slain, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of spirits of slain animals, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of ancestors, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='440'/><anchor id='Pg440'/>

<lg>
<l>Prussians, the old, their funeral feasts, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Pulque</hi>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Puppets or dolls employed for the restoration of souls to their bodies, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Purge as mode of ceremonial purification, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Purification of city, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Pimas after slaying Apaches, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of hunters and fishers, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of moral guilt by physical agencies, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by cutting the hair, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of manslayers, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>intended to rid them of the ghosts of the slain, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Purificatory ceremonies at reception of strangers, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on return from a journey, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Purity, ceremonial, observed in war, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pygmies, the African, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pythagoras, maxims of, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Python, punishment for killing a, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quartz used at circumcision instead of iron, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Queensland, aborigines of, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ra and Isis, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rabbah, siege of, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rain caused by cut or combed out hair, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>word for, not to be mentioned, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -charm by pouring water, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -makers, their hair unshorn, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rainbow, the, a net for souls, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Ramanga</hi>, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Raven, soul as a, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Raw flesh not to be looked on, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; meat, prohibition to touch or name, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reapers, special language employed by, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg411'>411</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reasoning, definite, at the base of savage custom, <ref target='Pg420'>420</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rebirth of ancestors in their descendants, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Recall of the soul, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Red, bodies of manslayers painted, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>faces of manslayers painted, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reflection, the soul identified with the, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reflections in water or mirrors, supposed dangers of, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Refuse of food, magic wrought by means of, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Regeneration, pretence of, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reincarnation of the dead in their namesakes, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of ancestors in their descendants, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reindeer, taboos concerning, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Relations, names of, tabooed, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Relationship, terms of, used as terms of address, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Release of prisoners at festivals, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Religion, passage of animism into, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reluctance to accept sovereignty on account of taboos attached to it, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Remnants of food buried as a precaution against sorcery, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Resemblance of child to father, supposed danger of, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Resurrection, cut hair and nails kept for use at the, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the dead effected by giving their names to living persons, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhys, Professor Sir John, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on personal names, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rice used to attract the soul conceived as a bird, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>soul of, not to be frightened, <ref target='Pg412'>412</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -harvest, special language employed by reapers at, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg411'>411</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ring, broken, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on ankle as badge of office, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rings used to prevent the escape of the soul, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as spiritual fetters, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as amulets, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be worn, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and knots tabooed, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rivers, Dr. W. H. R., <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rivers, prohibition to cross, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Robertson, Sir George Scott, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref> <hi rend='italic'>notes</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roepstorff, F. A. de, <ref target='Pg362'>362</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roman gods, their names not to be mentioned, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; superstition about crossed legs, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romans, their evocation of gods of besieged cities, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rome, name of guardian deity of Rome kept secret, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roscoe, Rev. J., <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>5</hi>, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>10</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roth, W. E., <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rotti, custom as to cutting child's hair in the island of, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom as to knots at marriage in the island of, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roumanian building superstition, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Royal blood not to be shed on the ground, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Royalty, the burden of, <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rules of life observed by sacred kings and priests, <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Runaways, knots as charm to stop, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Russell, F., <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sabaea or Sheba, kings of, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacred chiefs and kings regarded as dangerous, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their analogy
<pb n='441'/><anchor id='Pg441'/>
to mourners, homicides, and women at menstruation and childbirth, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacred and unclean, correspondence of rules regarding the, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacrifices to ghosts, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to the dead, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at foundation of buildings, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to ancestral spirits, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sagard, Gabriel, <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sahagun, B. de, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sailors at sea, special language employed by, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sakais, the, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sakalavas of Madagascar, the, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>customs as to names of dead kings among the, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salish Indians, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salmon, taboos concerning, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salt not to be eaten, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>name of, tabooed, <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -pans, continence observed by workers in, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samoyeds, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sanctity of the head, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; or pollution, their equivalence in primitive religion, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sankara and the Grand Lama, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saragacos Indians, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Satapatha Brahmana</hi>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saturday, persons born on a, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saturn, the planet, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Savage, our debt to the, <ref target='Pg419'>419</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; custom the product of definite reasoning, <ref target='Pg420'>420</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; philosophy, <ref target='Pg420'>420</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saxons of Transylvania, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scapegoat, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scarification of warriors, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of bodies of whalers, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scaring away the ghosts of the slain, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schoolcraft, H. R., <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scotch fowlers and fishermen, words tabooed by, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scotland, common words tabooed in, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scratching the person or head, rules as to, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scrofula thought to be caused and cured by touching a sacred chief or king, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sea, horror of the, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offerings made to the, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prohibition to look on the, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>special language employed by sailors at, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -mammals, atonement for killing, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>myth of their origin, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seals, supposed influence of lying-in women on, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taboos observed after the killing of, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref>, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seclusion of those who have handled the dead, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of women at menstruation and childbirth, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of tabooed persons, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of manslayers, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of cannibals, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of men who have killed large game, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Secret names among the Central Australian aborigines, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sedna, an Esquimau goddess, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref>, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Semangat, Malay word for the soul, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Semites, moral evolution of the, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seoul, capital of Corea, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Serpents, purificatory ceremonies observed after killing, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Servius, on Dido's costume, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seven knots in magic, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sewing as a charm, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shades of dead animals, fear of offending, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shadow, the soul identified with the, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>injury done to a man through his, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diminution of shadow regarded with apprehension, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>loss of the, regarded as ominous, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to fall on a chief, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shadows drawn out by ghosts, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>animals injured through their, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of trees sensitive, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of certain birds and people viewed as dangerous, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>built into the foundations of edifices, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of mourners dangerous, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of certain persons dangerous, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shamans among the Thompson Indians, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Buryat, their mode of recovering lost souls, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Yakut, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shark Point, priestly king at, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sharp instruments, use of, tabooed, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; weapons tabooed, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shaving prisoners, reason of, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sheep used in purificatory ceremony, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shoulder-blades of, used in divination, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shetland fishermen, their tabooed words, <ref target='Pg394'>394</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shoe untied at marriage, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom of going with one shoe on and one shoe off, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shoulder-blades, divination by, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shuswap Indians, the, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Siam, kings of, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>names of kings of, concealed from fear of sorcery, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Siamese children, ceremony at cutting their hair, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; view of the sanctity of the head, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sick man, attempts to prevent the escape of the soul of, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='442'/><anchor id='Pg442'/>

<lg>
<l>Sick people not allowed to sleep, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sprinkled with pungent spices, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -room, mirrors covered up in, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sickness explained by the absence of the soul, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>caused by ancestral spirits, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sierra Leone, priests and kings of, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Nevada of Colombia, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sigurd and Fafnir, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sikhim, kings of, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Silkworms, taboos observed by breeders of, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simpson, W., <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sin regarded as something material, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Singhalese, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>; their fear of demons, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Sins'/>
<l>Sins, confession of, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>originally a magical ceremony, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sisters-in-law, their names not to be pronounced, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref>, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sit, Egyptian god, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sitting on the ground prohibited to warriors, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Skull-cap worn by girls at their first menstruation, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worn by Australian widows, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Skulls of ancestors rubbed as a propitiation, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of dead used as drinking-cups, <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slain, ghosts of the, fear of the, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slave Coast, the, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slaves, runaway, charm for recovering, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sleep, absence of soul in, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sick people not allowed to, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>forbidden in house after a death, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>forbidden to unsuccessful eagle-hunter, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sleeper not to be wakened suddenly, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be moved nor his appearance altered, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smallpox not mentioned by its proper name, <ref target='Pg400'>400</ref>, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref>, <ref target='Pg411'>411</ref>, <ref target='Pg416'>416</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smearing blood on the person as a purification, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on persons, dogs, and weapons as a mode of pacifying their souls, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; bodies of manslayers with porridge, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; porridge or fat on the person as a purification, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sheep's entrails on body as mode of purification, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, W, Robertson, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>7</hi>, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>5</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith's craft regarded us uncanny, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>5</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Snakes not called by their proper names, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref>, <ref target='Pg400'>400</ref>, <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg411'>411</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Snapping the thumbs to prevent the departure of the soul, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Snares set for souls, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Son-in-law, his name not to be pronounced, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sorcerers, souls extracted or detained by, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>make use of cut hair and other bodily refuse, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><ref target='Pg278'>278</ref>, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref> sq. <hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Magic'>Magic</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Soul conceived as a mannikin, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the perils of the, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ancient Egyptian conception of the, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>representations of the soul in Greek art, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a butterfly, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>absence and recall of the, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attempts to prevent the soul from escaping from the body, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sickness attributed to the absence of the, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tied by thread or string to the body, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conceived as a bird, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>absent in sleep, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in form of mouse, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in form of lizard, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in form of fly, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>caught in a cloth, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identified with the shadow, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identified with the reflection in water or a mirror, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed to escape at eating and drinking, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the blood, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identified with the personal name, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of rice not to be frightened, <ref target='Pg412'>412</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Souls, every man thought to have four, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>light and heavy, thin and fat, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transferred to other bodies, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>impounded in magic fence, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>abducted by demons, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq</hi>.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transmigrate into animals, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>brought back in a visible form, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>caught in snares or nets, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>extracted or detained by sorcerers, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in tusks of ivory, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conjured into jars, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in boxes, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shut up in calabashes, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transferred from the living to the dead, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gathered into a basket, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wounded and bleeding, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed to be in portraits, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of beasts respected, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the dead all malignant, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cannot go to the spirit-land till the flesh has decayed from their bones, <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>5</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the slain, propitiation of, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sovereignty, reluctance to accept the, on account of its burdens, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spells cast by strangers, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at hair-cutting, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spenser, Edmund, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spices used in exorcism of demons, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spirit of dead apparently supposed to decay with the body, <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='443'/><anchor id='Pg443'/>

<lg>
<l>Spirits averse to iron, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of land, conciliation of the, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spiritual power, its divorce from temporal power, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spitting forbidden, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a protective charm, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>upon knots as a charm, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spittle effaced or concealed, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tabooed, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used in magic, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used in making a covenant, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spoil taken from enemy purified, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spoons used in eating by tabooed persons, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sprained leg, cure for, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spring and summer, myths of divinities and spirits to be told only in, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sprinkling with holy water, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Sylvester's Day, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stabbing reflections in water to injure the persons reflected, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stade, Hans, captive among Brazilian Indians, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Standard of conduct shifted from natural to supernatural basis, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stepping over persons or things forbidden, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg423'>423</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>over dead panther, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Jumping'>Jumping</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stone knives and arrow-heads used in religious ritual, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stones on which a man's shadow should not fall, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Storms caused by cutting or combing the hair, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strange land, ceremonies at entering a, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strangers, taboos on intercourse with, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>suspected of practising magical arts, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremonies at the reception of, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dread of, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>spells cast by, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killed, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>String or thread used to tie soul to body, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strings, knotted, as amulets, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Cords'>Cords</ref>, <ref target='Index-Threads'>Threads</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Strong names</q> of kings of Dahomey, <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sulka, the, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sultan Bayazid and his soul, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sultans veiled, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sumba, custom as to the names of princes in the island of, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Summer, myths of gods and spirits not to be told in, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and winter, personal names different in, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sun not allowed to shine on sacred persons, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -god draws away souls, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sunda, tabooed words in, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>, <ref target='Pg415'>415</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Supernatural basis of morality, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Supernatural beings, their names tabooed, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Superstition a crutch to morality, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swaheli charm, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sweating as a purification, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swelling and inflammation thought to be caused by eating out of sacred vessels or by wearing sacred garments, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sympathetic connexion between a person and the severed parts of his body, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; magic, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Synonyms adopted in order to avoid naming the dead, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the Zulu language, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the Maori language, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taboo of chiefs and kings in Tonga, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of chiefs in New Zealand, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Esquimaux theory of, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the meaning of, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; rajah and chief, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tabooed acts, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; hands, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; persons, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>secluded, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; things, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; words, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taboos, royal and priestly, <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on intercourse with strangers, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on eating and drinking, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on shewing the face, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on quitting the house, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on leaving food over, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on persons who have handled the dead, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on warriors, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on manslayers, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>imposed on murderers, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>imposed on hunters and fishers, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transformed into ethical precepts, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>survivals of, in morality, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as spiritual insulators, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on sharp weapons, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on blood, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>relating to the head, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on hair, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on spittle, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on foods, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on knots and rings, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on words, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on personal names, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on names of relations, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the names of the dead, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on names of kings and chiefs, <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on names of supernatural beings, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on names of gods, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; observed by the Mikado, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by headmen in Assam, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by ancient kings of Ireland, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by the Flamen Dialis, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by the Bodia or Bodio, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by sacred milkmen among the Todas, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tahiti, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='444'/><anchor id='Pg444'/>

<lg>
<l>Tahiti, kings of, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>abdicate on birth of a son, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their names not to be pronounced, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tails of cats docked as a magical precaution, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tales, wandering souls in popular, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tara, the old capital of Ireland, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tartar Khan, ceremony at visiting a, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Teeth'/>
<l>Teeth, loss of, supposed effect of breaking a taboo, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>loosened by angry ghosts, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a rain-charm, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>extracted, kept against the resurrection, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Tooth'>Tooth</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Temple at Jerusalem, the, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Temporary reincarnation of the dead in their living namesakes, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Tendi'/>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tendi</foreign>, Batta word for soul, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Tondi'>Tondi</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tepehuanes, the, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Terms of relationship used as terms of address, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thakambau, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thebes in Egypt, priestly kings of, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theocracies in America, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thesmophoria, release of prisoners at, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thessalian witch, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Things tabooed, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thompson Indians of British Columbia, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>customs of mourners among the, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thomson, Joseph, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thorn bushes to keep off ghosts, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thread or string used to tie soul to body, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Threads'/>
<l>Threads, knotted, in magic, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Three knots in magic, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thumbs snapped to prevent the departure of the soul, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thunderstorms caused by cut hair, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thurn, E. F. im, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tigers not called by their proper names, <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref>, <ref target='Pg402'>402</ref>, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref>, <ref target='Pg415'>415</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>called dogs, <ref target='Pg402'>402</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>called jackals, <ref target='Pg402'>402</ref>, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Timines of Sierra Leone, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Timor, fetish or taboo rajah in, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>customs as to war in, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tin ore, Malay superstitions as to, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tinneh or Déné Indians, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toboongkoos of Celebes, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Todas, holy milkmen of the, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Togoland, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tolampoos, the, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tolindoos, the, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Tondi'/>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tondi</foreign>, Batta word for soul, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Tendi'>Tendi</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tonga, divine chiefs in, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the taboo of chiefs and kings in, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taboos connected with the dead in, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tonquin, division of monarchy in, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kings of, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tooitonga</foreign>, divine chief of Tonga, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Tooth'/>
<l>Tooth knocked out as initiatory rite, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Teeth'>Teeth</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toradjas, tabooed names among the, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their field-speech, <ref target='Pg411'>411</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Touching sacred king or chief, supposed effects of, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trading voyages, continence observed on, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tradition, historical, hampered by the taboo on the names of the dead, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transference of souls from the living to the dead, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of souls to other bodies, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of sins, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transgressions, need of confessing, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Sins'>Sins</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transmigration of souls into animals, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transylvania, the Germans of, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref>, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Traps set for souls, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Travail, women in, knots on their garments untied, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Childbirth'>Childbirth</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Travellers, knots used as charms by, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tree-spirits, fear of, <ref target='Pg412'>412</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trees, the shadows of trees sensitive, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cut hair deposited on or under, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tuaregs, the, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>; their fear of ghosts, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tumleo, island of, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tupi Indians, their customs as to eating captives, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turtle catching, taboos in connexion with, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tusks of ivory, souls in, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Twelfth Night, <ref target='Pg396'>396</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Twins, water poured on graves of, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; father of, taboos observed by the, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his hair shaved and nails cut, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tycoons, the, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tying the soul to the body, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tylor, E. B., on reincarnation of ancestors, <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Uganda'/>
<l>Uganda, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref>, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref>, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Baganda'>Baganda</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ulster, kings of, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unclean and sacred, correspondence of the rules regarding the, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uncleanness regarded as a vapour, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of manslayers, of menstruous and lying-in women, and of persons who have handled the dead, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of whalers, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of lion-killer, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of bear-killers, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='445'/><anchor id='Pg445'/>

<lg>
<l>Uncovered in the open air, prohibition to be, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unyoro, king of, his custom of drinking milk, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cowboy of the king of, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diet of the king of, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vapour thought to be exhaled by lying-in women and hunters, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed, of blood and corpses, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed to be produced by the violation of a taboo, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Varuna, festival of, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Veiling faces to avert evil influences, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Venison, taboos concerning, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vermin from hair returned to their owner, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Vessels'/>
<l>Vessels used by tabooed persons destroyed, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; special, employed by tabooed persons, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Victims, sacrificial, carried round city, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vine, prohibition to walk under a, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virgil, the enchantress in, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on rustic militia of Latium, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vow, hair kept unshorn during a, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wabondei, the, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wadai, Sultan of, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Wakan</foreign>, mysterious, sacred, taboo, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wakelbura, the, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wallis Island, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Walrus, taboos concerning, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wanigela River, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wanika, the, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wanyamwesi, the, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wanyoro (Banyoro), the, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>War, continence in, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rules of ceremonial purity observed in, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hair kept unshorn in, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; chief, or war king, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -dances, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Warm food tabooed, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Warramunga, the, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Warriors tabooed, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Washing the head, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Bathing'>Bathing</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Water poured as a rain-charm, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>holy, sprinkling with, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -spirits, danger of, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wax figure in magic, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weapons of manslayers, purification of, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wedding ring, an amulet against witchcraft, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Were-wolf, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whale, solemn burial of dead, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whalers, taboos observed by, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wheaten flour, prohibition to touch, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>White, faces and bodies of manslayers painted, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lion-killer painted, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; clay, Caffre boys at circumcision smeared with, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whydah, king of, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Widows and widowers, customs observed by, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wied, Prince of, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wife's mother, the savage's dread of his, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her name not to be pronounced by her son-in-law, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; name not to be pronounced by her husband, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wild beasts not called by their proper names, <ref target='Pg396'>396</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilkinson, R. J., <ref target='Pg416'>416</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Willow wands as disinfectants, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Windessi, in New Guinea, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winds kept in jars, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wine, the blood of the vine, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>called milk, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wing-bone of eagle used to drink through, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winter, myths of gods and spirits to be told only in, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wirajuri, the, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Witch's soul departs from her in sleep, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Witches make use of cut hair, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wollunqua, a mythical serpent, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wolofs of Senegambia, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wolves, charms to protect cattle from, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be called by their proper names, <ref target='Pg396'>396</ref>, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref>, <ref target='Pg398'>398</ref>, <ref target='Pg402'>402</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Women tabooed at menstruation and childbirth, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>abstinence from, during war, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in childbed holy, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>blood of, dreaded, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Women's clothes, supposed effects of touching, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Women's speech</q> among the Caffres, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Words tabooed, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>savages take a materialistic view of words, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; common, changed because they are the names of the dead, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>or the names of chiefs and kings, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tabooed, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wounded men not allowed to drink milk, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wrist tied to prevent escape of soul, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>&mdash;&mdash; bands as amulets, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wurunjeri tribe, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='446'/><anchor id='Pg446'/>

<lg>
<l>Xenophanes, on the gods, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yabim, the, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yakut shaman, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yams, Feast of, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yaos, the, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yawning, soul supposed to depart in, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yewe order, secret society in Togo, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yorubas, rebirth of ancestors among the, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zapotecs of Mexico, the pontiff of the, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zend-Avesta, the, on cut hair and nails, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zeus on Mount Lycaeus, sanctuary of, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zulu language, its diversity, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zulus, names of chiefs and kings tabooed among the, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their superstition as to reflections in water, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref></l>
</lg>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
